doc/sphinx-guides/source/admin/dataverses-datasets.rst, before:

Managing Datasets and Dataverses
================================

.. contents:: |toctitle|
	:local:

Dataverses
----------

Move a Dataverse
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Moves a dataverse whose id is passed to a new dataverse whose id is passed. The dataverse alias also may be used instead of the id. If the moved dataverse has a guestbook, template, metadata block, link, or featured dataverse that is not compatible with the destination dataverse, you will be informed and given the option to force the move and remove the association. Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST http://$SERVER/api/dataverses/$id/move/$destination-id

Link a Dataverse
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Creates a link between a dataverse and another dataverse (see the Linked Dataverses + Linked Datasets section of the :doc:`/user/dataverse-management` guide for more information). Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X PUT http://$SERVER/api/dataverses/$linked-dataverse-alias/link/$linking-dataverse-alias

Unlink a Dataverse
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Removes a link between a dataverse and another dataverse. Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X DELETE http://$SERVER/api/dataverses/$linked-dataverse-alias/deleteLink/$linking-dataverse-alias

Add Dataverse RoleAssignments to Child Dataverses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Recursively assigns the users and groups having a role(s),that are in the set configured to be inheritable via the :InheritParentRoleAssignments setting, on a specified dataverse to have the same role assignments on all of the dataverses that have been created within it. The response indicates success or failure and lists the individuals/groups and dataverses involved in the update. Only accessible to superusers. ::
 
    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" http://$SERVER/api/admin/dataverse/$dataverse-alias//addRoleAssignmentsToChildren

Datasets
--------

Move a Dataset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Moves a dataset whose id is passed to a dataverse whose alias is passed. If the moved dataset has a guestbook or a dataverse link that is not compatible with the destination dataverse, you will be informed and given the option to force the move and remove the guestbook or link. Only accessible to users with permission to publish the dataset in the original and destination dataverse. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST http://$SERVER/api/datasets/$id/move/$alias

Link a Dataset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Creates a link between a dataset and a dataverse (see the Linked Dataverses + Linked Datasets section of the :doc:`/user/dataverse-management` guide for more information). ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X PUT http://$SERVER/api/datasets/$linked-dataset-id/link/$linking-dataverse-alias

Unlink a Dataset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Removes a link between a dataset and a dataverse. Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X DELETE http://$SERVER/api/datasets/$linked-dataset-id/deleteLink/$linking-dataverse-alias

Mint new PID for a Dataset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Mints a new identifier for a dataset previously registered with a handle. Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST http://$SERVER/api/admin/$dataset-id/reregisterHDLToPID
    
Send Dataset metadata to PID provider
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Forces update to metadata provided to the PID provider of a published dataset. Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST http://$SERVER/api/datasets/$dataset-id/modifyRegistrationMetadata

Make Metadata Updates Without Changing Dataset Version
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As a superuser, click "Update Current Version" when publishing.

Commit message:

note that update current is only avail when minor version is

doc/sphinx-guides/source/admin/dataverses-datasets.rst, after:

Managing Datasets and Dataverses
================================

.. contents:: |toctitle|
	:local:

Dataverses
----------

Move a Dataverse
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Moves a dataverse whose id is passed to a new dataverse whose id is passed. The dataverse alias also may be used instead of the id. If the moved dataverse has a guestbook, template, metadata block, link, or featured dataverse that is not compatible with the destination dataverse, you will be informed and given the option to force the move and remove the association. Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST http://$SERVER/api/dataverses/$id/move/$destination-id

Link a Dataverse
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Creates a link between a dataverse and another dataverse (see the Linked Dataverses + Linked Datasets section of the :doc:`/user/dataverse-management` guide for more information). Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X PUT http://$SERVER/api/dataverses/$linked-dataverse-alias/link/$linking-dataverse-alias

Unlink a Dataverse
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Removes a link between a dataverse and another dataverse. Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X DELETE http://$SERVER/api/dataverses/$linked-dataverse-alias/deleteLink/$linking-dataverse-alias

Add Dataverse RoleAssignments to Child Dataverses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Recursively assigns the users and groups having a role(s),that are in the set configured to be inheritable via the :InheritParentRoleAssignments setting, on a specified dataverse to have the same role assignments on all of the dataverses that have been created within it. The response indicates success or failure and lists the individuals/groups and dataverses involved in the update. Only accessible to superusers. ::
 
    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" http://$SERVER/api/admin/dataverse/$dataverse-alias//addRoleAssignmentsToChildren

Datasets
--------

Move a Dataset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Moves a dataset whose id is passed to a dataverse whose alias is passed. If the moved dataset has a guestbook or a dataverse link that is not compatible with the destination dataverse, you will be informed and given the option to force the move and remove the guestbook or link. Only accessible to users with permission to publish the dataset in the original and destination dataverse. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST http://$SERVER/api/datasets/$id/move/$alias

Link a Dataset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Creates a link between a dataset and a dataverse (see the Linked Dataverses + Linked Datasets section of the :doc:`/user/dataverse-management` guide for more information). ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X PUT http://$SERVER/api/datasets/$linked-dataset-id/link/$linking-dataverse-alias

Unlink a Dataset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Removes a link between a dataset and a dataverse. Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X DELETE http://$SERVER/api/datasets/$linked-dataset-id/deleteLink/$linking-dataverse-alias

Mint new PID for a Dataset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Mints a new identifier for a dataset previously registered with a handle. Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST http://$SERVER/api/admin/$dataset-id/reregisterHDLToPID
    
Send Dataset metadata to PID provider
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Forces update to metadata provided to the PID provider of a published dataset. Only accessible to superusers. ::

    curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST http://$SERVER/api/datasets/$dataset-id/modifyRegistrationMetadata

Make Metadata Updates Without Changing Dataset Version
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As a superuser, click "Update Current Version" when publishing. (This option is only available when a 'Minor' update would be allowed.)
