doc/sphinx-guides/source/admin/integrations.rst, before:

Integrations
============

Now that you've installed Dataverse, you might want to set up some integrations with other systems. Many of these integrations are open source and are cross listed in the :doc:`/api/apps` section of the API Guide.

.. contents:: Contents:
	:local:

Getting Data In
---------------

A variety of integrations are oriented toward making it easier for your researchers to deposit data into your installation of Dataverse.

Dropbox
+++++++

If your researchers have data on Dropbox, you can make it easier for them to get it into Dataverse by setting the :ref:`dataverse.dropbox.key` JVM option described in the :doc:`/installation/config` section of the Installation Guide.

Open Science Framework (OSF)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The Center for Open Science's Open Science Framework (OSF) is an open source software project that facilitates open collaboration in science research across the lifespan of a scientific project. 

For instructions on depositing data from OSF to your installation of Dataverse, your researchers can visit http://help.osf.io/m/addons/l/863978-connect-dataverse-to-a-project 

RSpace
++++++

RSpace is an affordable and secure enterprise grade electronic lab notebook (ELN) for researchers to capture and organize data.

For instructions on depositing data from RSpace to your installation of Dataverse, your researchers can visit https://www.researchspace.com/help-and-support-resources/dataverse-integration/

Open Journal Systems (OJS)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Open Journal Systems (OJS) is a journal management and publishing system that has been developed by the Public Knowledge Project to expand and improve access to research.

The OJS Dataverse Plugin adds data sharing and preservation to the OJS publication process.

As of this writing only OJS 2.x is supported and instructions for getting started can be found at https://github.com/pkp/ojs/tree/ojs-stable-2_4_8/plugins/generic/dataverse

If you are interested in OJS 3.x supporting deposit from Dataverse, please leave a comment on https://github.com/pkp/pkp-lib/issues/1822

Analysis and Computation
------------------------

Data Explorer
+++++++++++++

Data Explorer is a GUI which lists the variables in a tabular data file allowing searching, charting and cross tabulation analysis. 

For installation instructions, see the :doc:`/installation/external-tools` section of the Installation Guide.

TwoRavens/Zelig
+++++++++++++++

TwoRavens is a web application for tabular data exploration and statistical analysis with Zelig.

For installation instructions, see the :doc:`/installation/external-tools` section of the Installation Guide.

WorldMap
++++++++

WorldMap helps researchers visualize and explore geospatial data by creating maps.

For installation instructions, see :doc:`geoconnect-worldmap`.

Compute Button
++++++++++++++

The "Compute" button is still highly experimental and has special requirements such as use of a Swift object store, but it is documented under "Setting up Compute" in the :doc:`/installation/config` section of the Installation Guide.

Discoverability
---------------

Integration with `DataCite <https://datacite.org>`_ is built in to Dataverse. When datasets are published, metadata is sent to DataCite. You can futher increase the discoverability of your datasets by setting up additional integrations.

OAI-PMH (Harvesting)
++++++++++++++++++++

Dataverse supports a protocol called OAI-PMH that facilitates harvesting datasets from one system into another. For details on harvesting, see the :doc:`harvestserver` section.

SHARE
+++++

`SHARE <http://www.share-research.org>`_ is building a free, open, data set about research and scholarly activities across their life cycle. It's possible to add and installation of Dataverse as one of the `sources <https://share.osf.io/sources>`_ they include if you contact the SHARE team.

Future Integrations
-------------------

The `Dataverse roadmap <https://dataverse.org/goals-roadmap-and-releases>`_ is a good place to see integrations that the core Dataverse team is working on.

The `Dev Efforts by the Dataverse Community <https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1pl9U0_CtWQ3oz6ZllvSHeyB0EG1M_vZEC_aZ7hREnhE/edit?usp=sharing>`_ spreadsheet is the best way to track integrations that are being worked on by the Dataverse community.

Please help us keep this page up to date making a pull request! To get started, see the :doc:`/developers/documentation` section of the Developer Guide.

Commit message:

Added Whole Tale external tools integration descriptions

doc/sphinx-guides/source/admin/integrations.rst, after:

Integrations
============

Now that you've installed Dataverse, you might want to set up some integrations with other systems. Many of these integrations are open source and are cross listed in the :doc:`/api/apps` section of the API Guide.

.. contents:: Contents:
	:local:

Getting Data In
---------------

A variety of integrations are oriented toward making it easier for your researchers to deposit data into your installation of Dataverse.

Dropbox
+++++++

If your researchers have data on Dropbox, you can make it easier for them to get it into Dataverse by setting the :ref:`dataverse.dropbox.key` JVM option described in the :doc:`/installation/config` section of the Installation Guide.

Open Science Framework (OSF)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The Center for Open Science's Open Science Framework (OSF) is an open source software project that facilitates open collaboration in science research across the lifespan of a scientific project. 

For instructions on depositing data from OSF to your installation of Dataverse, your researchers can visit http://help.osf.io/m/addons/l/863978-connect-dataverse-to-a-project 

RSpace
++++++

RSpace is an affordable and secure enterprise grade electronic lab notebook (ELN) for researchers to capture and organize data.

For instructions on depositing data from RSpace to your installation of Dataverse, your researchers can visit https://www.researchspace.com/help-and-support-resources/dataverse-integration/

Open Journal Systems (OJS)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Open Journal Systems (OJS) is a journal management and publishing system that has been developed by the Public Knowledge Project to expand and improve access to research.

The OJS Dataverse Plugin adds data sharing and preservation to the OJS publication process.

As of this writing only OJS 2.x is supported and instructions for getting started can be found at https://github.com/pkp/ojs/tree/ojs-stable-2_4_8/plugins/generic/dataverse

If you are interested in OJS 3.x supporting deposit from Dataverse, please leave a comment on https://github.com/pkp/pkp-lib/issues/1822

Analysis and Computation
------------------------

Data Explorer
+++++++++++++

Data Explorer is a GUI which lists the variables in a tabular data file allowing searching, charting and cross tabulation analysis. 

For installation instructions, see the :doc:`/installation/external-tools` section of the Installation Guide.

TwoRavens/Zelig
+++++++++++++++

TwoRavens is a web application for tabular data exploration and statistical analysis with Zelig.

For installation instructions, see the :doc:`/installation/external-tools` section of the Installation Guide.

WorldMap
++++++++

WorldMap helps researchers visualize and explore geospatial data by creating maps.

For installation instructions, see :doc:`geoconnect-worldmap`.

Compute Button
++++++++++++++

The "Compute" button is still highly experimental and has special requirements such as use of a Swift object store, but it is documented under "Setting up Compute" in the :doc:`/installation/config` section of the Installation Guide.

Whole Tale
++++++++++

`Whole Tale <https://www.wholetale.org>`_  enables researchers to analyze data using popular tools including Jupyter and RStudio with the ultimate goal of supporting publishing of reproducible research packages.

For installation instructions, see the :doc:`/installation/external-tools` section of the Installation Guide or the `Integration <https://wholetale.readthedocs.io/users_guide/integration.html>`_ section of the Whole Tale User Guide.

Discoverability
---------------

Integration with `DataCite <https://datacite.org>`_ is built in to Dataverse. When datasets are published, metadata is sent to DataCite. You can futher increase the discoverability of your datasets by setting up additional integrations.

OAI-PMH (Harvesting)
++++++++++++++++++++

Dataverse supports a protocol called OAI-PMH that facilitates harvesting datasets from one system into another. For details on harvesting, see the :doc:`harvestserver` section.

SHARE
+++++

`SHARE <http://www.share-research.org>`_ is building a free, open, data set about research and scholarly activities across their life cycle. It's possible to add and installation of Dataverse as one of the `sources <https://share.osf.io/sources>`_ they include if you contact the SHARE team.

Future Integrations
-------------------

The `Dataverse roadmap <https://dataverse.org/goals-roadmap-and-releases>`_ is a good place to see integrations that the core Dataverse team is working on.

The `Dev Efforts by the Dataverse Community <https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1pl9U0_CtWQ3oz6ZllvSHeyB0EG1M_vZEC_aZ7hREnhE/edit?usp=sharing>`_ spreadsheet is the best way to track integrations that are being worked on by the Dataverse community.

Please help us keep this page up to date making a pull request! To get started, see the :doc:`/developers/documentation` section of the Developer Guide.
