doc/sphinx-guides/source/admin/troubleshooting.rst, before:

.. role:: fixedwidthplain

Troubleshooting
===============

Sometimes Dataverse users get into trouble. Sometimes Dataverse itself gets into trouble. If something has gone wrong, this section is for you.

.. contents:: Contents:
	:local:

Using Dataverse APIs to Troubleshoot and Fix Problems
-----------------------------------------------------

See the :doc:`/api/intro` section of the API Guide for a high level overview of Dataverse APIs. Below are listed problems that support teams might encounter that can be handled via API (sometimes only via API).

A Dataset Is Locked And Cannot Be Edited or Published
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It's normal for the ingest process described in the :doc:`/user/tabulardataingest/ingestprocess` section of the User Guide to take some time but if hours or days have passed and the dataset is still locked, you might want to inspect the locks and consider deleting some or all of them.

See :doc:`dataverses-datasets`.

Someone Created Spam Datasets and I Need to Delete Them
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Depending on how open your installation of Dataverse is to the general public creating datasets, you may sometimes need to deal with spam datasets.

Look for "destroy" in the :doc:`/api/native-api` section of the API Guide.

A User Needs Their Account to Be Converted From Institutional (Shibboleth), ORCID, Google, or GitHub to Something Else
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See :ref:`converting-shibboleth-users-to-local` and :ref:`converting-oauth-users-to-local`.

.. _troubleshooting-glassfish:

Glassfish
---------

.. _glassfish-log:

Finding the Glassfish Log File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``/usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/logs/server.log`` is the main place to look when you encounter problems (assuming you installed Glassfish in the default directory). Hopefully an error message has been logged. If there's a stack trace, it may be of interest to developers, especially they can trace line numbers back to a tagged version or commit. Send more of the stack trace (the entire file if possible) to developers who can help (see "Getting Help", below) and be sure to say which version of Dataverse you are running.

.. _increase-glassfish-logging:

Increasing Glassfish Logging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For debugging purposes, you may find it helpful to temporarily increase logging levels. Here's an example of increasing logging for the Java class behind the "datasets" API endpoints:

``./asadmin set-log-levels edu.harvard.iq.dataverse.api.Datasets=FINE``

For more on setting log levels, see the :doc:`/developers/debugging` section of the Developer Guide.

Our guides focus on using the command line to manage Glassfish but you might be interested in an admin GUI at http://localhost:4848


Deployment fails, "EJB Timer Service not available"
---------------------------------------------------

Sometimes the Dataverse application fails to deploy, or Glassfish fails to restart once the application is deployed, with the following error message: :fixedwidthplain:`"remote failure: Error occurred during deployment: Exception while loading the app : EJB Timer Service is not available. Please see server.log for more details."`

We don't know what's causing this issue, but here's a known workaround: 

- Stop Glassfish; 

- Remove the ``generated`` and ``osgi-cache`` directories; 

- Delete all the rows from the ``EJB__TIMER__TBL`` table in the database;

- Start Glassfish

The shell script below performs the steps above. 
Note that it may or may not work on your system, so it is provided as an example only, downloadable :download:`here </_static/util/clear_timer.sh>`. Aside from the configuration values that need to be changed to reflect your environment (the Glassfish directory, name of the database, etc.) the script relies on the database being configured in a certain way for access. (See the comments in the script for more information)

.. literalinclude:: ../_static/util/clear_timer.sh

.. _timer-not-working:

Timer Not Working
-----------------

Dataverse relies on EJB timers to perform scheduled tasks: harvesting from remote servers, updating the local OAI sets and running metadata exports. (See :doc:`timers` for details.) If these scheduled jobs are not running on your server, this may be the result of the incompatibility between the version of PostgreSQL database you are using, and PostgreSQL JDBC driver in use by your instance of Glassfish. The symptoms:

If you are seeing the following in your server.log...

:fixedwidthplain:`Handling timeout on` ...

followed by an Exception stack trace with these lines in it: 

:fixedwidthplain:`Internal Exception: java.io.StreamCorruptedException: invalid stream header` ...

:fixedwidthplain:`Exception Description: Could not deserialize object from byte array` ...


... it most likely means that it is the JDBC driver incompatibility that's preventing the timer from working correctly. 
Make sure you install the correct version of the driver. For example, if you are running the version 9.3 of PostgreSQL, make sure you have the driver postgresql-9.3-1104.jdbc4.jar in your :fixedwidthplain:`<GLASSFISH FOLDER>/glassfish/lib` directory. Go `here <https://jdbc.postgresql.org/download.html>`_
to download the correct version of the driver. If you have an older driver in glassfish/lib, make sure to remove it, replace it with the new version and restart Glassfish. (You may need to remove the entire contents of :fixedwidthplain:`<GLASSFISH FOLDER>/glassfish/domains/domain1/generated` before you start Glassfish). 


Constraint Violations Issues
----------------------------

In real life production use, it may be possible to end up in a situation where some values associated with the datasets in your database are no longer valid under the constraints enforced by the latest version of Dataverse. This is not very likely to happen, but if it does, the symptomps will be as follows: Some datasets can no longer be edited, long exception stack traces logged in the Glassfish server log, caused by::

   javax.validation.ConstraintViolationException: 
   Bean Validation constraint(s) violated while executing Automatic Bean Validation on callback event:'preUpdate'. 
   Please refer to embedded ConstraintViolations for details.

(contrary to what the message suggests, there are no specific "details" anywhere in the stack trace that would explain what values violate which constraints)  

To identifiy the specific invalid values in the affected datasets, or to check all the datasets in the Dataverse for constraint violations, see :ref:`Dataset Validation <dataset-validation-api>` in the :doc:`/api/native-api` section of the User Guide.

Many Files with a File Type of "Unknown", "Application", or "Binary"
--------------------------------------------------------------------

From the home page of a Dataverse installation you can get a count of files by file type by clicking "Files" and then scrolling down to "File Type". If you see a lot of files that are "Unknown", "Application", or "Binary" you can have Dataverse attempt to redetect the file type by using the :ref:`Redetect File Type <redetect-file-type>` API endpoint.

Getting Help
------------

If the troubleshooting advice above didn't help, contact any of the support channels mentioned in the :ref:`support` section of the Installation Guide.

Commit message:

documentation for validate-files-on-publish. (#6558)

doc/sphinx-guides/source/admin/troubleshooting.rst, after:

.. role:: fixedwidthplain

Troubleshooting
===============

Sometimes Dataverse users get into trouble. Sometimes Dataverse itself gets into trouble. If something has gone wrong, this section is for you.

.. contents:: Contents:
	:local:

Using Dataverse APIs to Troubleshoot and Fix Problems
-----------------------------------------------------

See the :doc:`/api/intro` section of the API Guide for a high level overview of Dataverse APIs. Below are listed problems that support teams might encounter that can be handled via API (sometimes only via API).

A Dataset Is Locked And Cannot Be Edited or Published
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It's normal for the ingest process described in the :doc:`/user/tabulardataingest/ingestprocess` section of the User Guide to take some time but if hours or days have passed and the dataset is still locked, you might want to inspect the locks and consider deleting some or all of them. It is recommended to restart the application server if you are deleting an ingest lock, to make sure the ingest job is no longer running in the background. 

A dataset is locked with a lock of type "finalizePublication" (the lock type appears in the "reason" column of the DatasetLock table) while the persistent identifiers of the datafiles in the dataset are registered or updated, and/or while the physical files are being validated by recalculating the checksums and verifying them against the values stored in the database, before the publication process can be complete (Note that either of the two tasks can be disabled with database options - see :doc:`config`). If a dataset has been stuck in this state for a long period of time, check the "Info" value of the entry in the corresponding DatasetLock table. If it says "FILE VALIDATION ERROR" - it really means that one or more of the files have failed the validation and the problem must be resolved (or the datafile purged from the dataset) before you delete the lock and advice the user to try publishing again. Real issues that have resulted in corrupted datafiles during normal operation of Dataverse in the past: Botched file deletes - while a datafile is in DRAFT, attempting to delete it from the dataset also involved deleting the physical files. In the past we've observed partially successful deletes, that would fail to delete the entry from the database, after having successfully removed the physical files - resulting in a datafile linked to a missing file. We believe we have addressed what was causing this condition so it shouldn't happen again - there may be a datafile in this state in your database. Solving the issue would involve either restoring the file from backups, or, if that is not an option, purging the datafile from the databaes and asking the user to upload the file again. Another real life condition we've seen: a failed tabular data ingest that leaves the datafile un-ingested, BUT with the physical file already replaced by the generated tab-delimited version of the data. This datafile will fail to validate because the checksum in the database is of the original file and will not match that of the tab-delimited version. To fix: luckily, this is easily reversable, since the uploaded original should be saved in your storage, with the .orig extension. Simply swapping the .orig copy with the main file associated with the datafile will fix it. Similarly, we believe this condition should not happen again in Dataverse versions 4.20+, but you may have some legacy cases on your server. The goal of the validation framework is to catch these types of conditions while the dataset is still in DRAFT. 

If the finalizePublication lock has the info label "Registering PIDs for Datafiles" or "Validating Datafiles Asynchronously", and the dataset has been in this state for hours or longer, it is somewhat safe to assume that it is stuck (for example, the process may have been interrupted by an application server restart, or a system crash), so you may want to remove the lock (make sure the application server is restarted) and advice the user to try publishing again. 

See :doc:`dataverses-datasets`.

Someone Created Spam Datasets and I Need to Delete Them
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Depending on how open your installation of Dataverse is to the general public creating datasets, you may sometimes need to deal with spam datasets.

Look for "destroy" in the :doc:`/api/native-api` section of the API Guide.

A User Needs Their Account to Be Converted From Institutional (Shibboleth), ORCID, Google, or GitHub to Something Else
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See :ref:`converting-shibboleth-users-to-local` and :ref:`converting-oauth-users-to-local`.

.. _troubleshooting-glassfish:

Glassfish
---------

.. _glassfish-log:

Finding the Glassfish Log File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``/usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/logs/server.log`` is the main place to look when you encounter problems (assuming you installed Glassfish in the default directory). Hopefully an error message has been logged. If there's a stack trace, it may be of interest to developers, especially they can trace line numbers back to a tagged version or commit. Send more of the stack trace (the entire file if possible) to developers who can help (see "Getting Help", below) and be sure to say which version of Dataverse you are running.

.. _increase-glassfish-logging:

Increasing Glassfish Logging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For debugging purposes, you may find it helpful to temporarily increase logging levels. Here's an example of increasing logging for the Java class behind the "datasets" API endpoints:

``./asadmin set-log-levels edu.harvard.iq.dataverse.api.Datasets=FINE``

For more on setting log levels, see the :doc:`/developers/debugging` section of the Developer Guide.

Our guides focus on using the command line to manage Glassfish but you might be interested in an admin GUI at http://localhost:4848


Deployment fails, "EJB Timer Service not available"
---------------------------------------------------

Sometimes the Dataverse application fails to deploy, or Glassfish fails to restart once the application is deployed, with the following error message: :fixedwidthplain:`"remote failure: Error occurred during deployment: Exception while loading the app : EJB Timer Service is not available. Please see server.log for more details."`

We don't know what's causing this issue, but here's a known workaround: 

- Stop Glassfish; 

- Remove the ``generated`` and ``osgi-cache`` directories; 

- Delete all the rows from the ``EJB__TIMER__TBL`` table in the database;

- Start Glassfish

The shell script below performs the steps above. 
Note that it may or may not work on your system, so it is provided as an example only, downloadable :download:`here </_static/util/clear_timer.sh>`. Aside from the configuration values that need to be changed to reflect your environment (the Glassfish directory, name of the database, etc.) the script relies on the database being configured in a certain way for access. (See the comments in the script for more information)

.. literalinclude:: ../_static/util/clear_timer.sh

.. _timer-not-working:

Timer Not Working
-----------------

Dataverse relies on EJB timers to perform scheduled tasks: harvesting from remote servers, updating the local OAI sets and running metadata exports. (See :doc:`timers` for details.) If these scheduled jobs are not running on your server, this may be the result of the incompatibility between the version of PostgreSQL database you are using, and PostgreSQL JDBC driver in use by your instance of Glassfish. The symptoms:

If you are seeing the following in your server.log...

:fixedwidthplain:`Handling timeout on` ...

followed by an Exception stack trace with these lines in it: 

:fixedwidthplain:`Internal Exception: java.io.StreamCorruptedException: invalid stream header` ...

:fixedwidthplain:`Exception Description: Could not deserialize object from byte array` ...


... it most likely means that it is the JDBC driver incompatibility that's preventing the timer from working correctly. 
Make sure you install the correct version of the driver. For example, if you are running the version 9.3 of PostgreSQL, make sure you have the driver postgresql-9.3-1104.jdbc4.jar in your :fixedwidthplain:`<GLASSFISH FOLDER>/glassfish/lib` directory. Go `here <https://jdbc.postgresql.org/download.html>`_
to download the correct version of the driver. If you have an older driver in glassfish/lib, make sure to remove it, replace it with the new version and restart Glassfish. (You may need to remove the entire contents of :fixedwidthplain:`<GLASSFISH FOLDER>/glassfish/domains/domain1/generated` before you start Glassfish). 


Constraint Violations Issues
----------------------------

In real life production use, it may be possible to end up in a situation where some values associated with the datasets in your database are no longer valid under the constraints enforced by the latest version of Dataverse. This is not very likely to happen, but if it does, the symptomps will be as follows: Some datasets can no longer be edited, long exception stack traces logged in the Glassfish server log, caused by::

   javax.validation.ConstraintViolationException: 
   Bean Validation constraint(s) violated while executing Automatic Bean Validation on callback event:'preUpdate'. 
   Please refer to embedded ConstraintViolations for details.

(contrary to what the message suggests, there are no specific "details" anywhere in the stack trace that would explain what values violate which constraints)  

To identifiy the specific invalid values in the affected datasets, or to check all the datasets in the Dataverse for constraint violations, see :ref:`Dataset Validation <dataset-validation-api>` in the :doc:`/api/native-api` section of the User Guide.

Many Files with a File Type of "Unknown", "Application", or "Binary"
--------------------------------------------------------------------

From the home page of a Dataverse installation you can get a count of files by file type by clicking "Files" and then scrolling down to "File Type". If you see a lot of files that are "Unknown", "Application", or "Binary" you can have Dataverse attempt to redetect the file type by using the :ref:`Redetect File Type <redetect-file-type>` API endpoint.

Getting Help
------------

If the troubleshooting advice above didn't help, contact any of the support channels mentioned in the :ref:`support` section of the Installation Guide.
