doc/sphinx-guides/source/admin/user-administration.rst, before:

User Administration
===================

This section focuses on user administration tools and tasks. 

.. contents:: Contents:
	:local:

Manage Users Table
------------------

The Manage Users table gives the network administrator a list of all user accounts in table form. It lists username, full name, email address, and whether or not the user has Superuser status.

Usernames are listed alphabetically and clicking on a username takes you to the account page that contains detailed information on that account.

You can access the Manage Users table by clicking the "Manage Users" button on the Dashboard, which is linked from the header of all Dataverse pages (if you're loggied in as an administrator).

Confirm Email
-------------

Dataverse encourages builtin/local users to verify their email address upon signup or email change so that sysadmins can be assured that users can be contacted.

The app will send a standard welcome email with a URL the user can click, which, when activated, will store a ``lastconfirmed`` timestamp in the ``authenticateduser`` table of the database. Any time this is "null" for a user (immediately after signup and/or changing of their Dataverse email address), their current email on file is considered to not be verified. The link that is sent expires after a time (the default is 24 hours), but this is configurable by a superuser via the ``:MinutesUntilConfirmEmailTokenExpires`` config option.

Should users' URL token expire, they will see a "Verify Email" button on the account information page to send another URL.

Sysadmins can determine which users have verified their email addresses by looking for the presence of the value ``emailLastConfirmed`` in the JSON output from listing users (see the "Admin" section of the :doc:`/api/native-api`). As mentioned in the :doc:`/user/account` section of the User Guide, the email addresses for Shibboleth users are re-confirmed on every login.

Deleting an API Token
---------------------

If an API token is compromised it should be deleted. Users can generate a new one for themselves as explained in the :doc:`/user/account` section of the User Guide, but you may want to preemptively delete tokens from the database.

Using the API token 7ae33670-be21-491d-a244-008149856437 as an example:

``delete from apitoken where tokenstring = '7ae33670-be21-491d-a244-008149856437';``

You should expect the output ``DELETE 1`` after issuing the command above.

Commit message:

Docs - info about role removal [ref:#4055]
Added documentation for this issue, and also  expanded the user table
section to include an explanation of how searching the table works.

doc/sphinx-guides/source/admin/user-administration.rst, after:

User Administration
===================

This section focuses on user administration tools and tasks. 

.. contents:: Contents:
	:local:

Manage Users Table
------------------

The Manage Users table gives the network administrator a list of all user accounts in table form. You can access it by clicking the "Manage Users" button on the Dashboard, which is linked from the header of all Dataverse pages (if you're logged in as an administrator). It lists username, full name, email address, affiliation, the authentication method they use, the roles their account has been granted, and whether or not they have Superuser status.

Users are listed alphabetically by username. The search bar above the table allows you to search for a specific user. It performs a right-truncated wildcard search of the Username, Name, and Email columns. This means, if you search "baseba" then it will search those three columns for any string of text that begins with "baseba", e.g. "baseball" or "baseballfan".

If you would like to remove all roles/permissions from a user's account (in the event of their leaving your organization, for example) then you can do so by clicking the "Remove All" button under the Roles column. This will keep the user's account active, but will revert it to put the account on the level of a default user with default permissions.


Confirm Email
-------------

Dataverse encourages builtin/local users to verify their email address upon signup or email change so that sysadmins can be assured that users can be contacted.

The app will send a standard welcome email with a URL the user can click, which, when activated, will store a ``lastconfirmed`` timestamp in the ``authenticateduser`` table of the database. Any time this is "null" for a user (immediately after signup and/or changing of their Dataverse email address), their current email on file is considered to not be verified. The link that is sent expires after a time (the default is 24 hours), but this is configurable by a superuser via the ``:MinutesUntilConfirmEmailTokenExpires`` config option.

Should users' URL token expire, they will see a "Verify Email" button on the account information page to send another URL.

Sysadmins can determine which users have verified their email addresses by looking for the presence of the value ``emailLastConfirmed`` in the JSON output from listing users (see the "Admin" section of the :doc:`/api/native-api`). As mentioned in the :doc:`/user/account` section of the User Guide, the email addresses for Shibboleth users are re-confirmed on every login.

Deleting an API Token
---------------------

If an API token is compromised it should be deleted. Users can generate a new one for themselves as explained in the :doc:`/user/account` section of the User Guide, but you may want to preemptively delete tokens from the database.

Using the API token 7ae33670-be21-491d-a244-008149856437 as an example:

``delete from apitoken where tokenstring = '7ae33670-be21-491d-a244-008149856437';``

You should expect the output ``DELETE 1`` after issuing the command above.
