doc/sphinx-guides/source/api/apps.rst, before:

Apps
====

The introduction of Dataverse APIs has fostered the development of apps that are listed at http://dataverse.org/integrations

The apps below are open source, demonstrating how to use Dataverse APIs. Some of these apps (and others) are built on :doc:`/api/client-libraries` that are available for Dataverse APIs.

.. contents:: |toctitle|
	:local:

Javascript
----------

TwoRavens
~~~~~~~~~

TwoRavens is a system of interlocking statistical tools for data exploration, analysis, and meta-analysis.

https://github.com/IQSS/TwoRavens

PHP
---

OJS
~~~

The Open Journal Systems (OJS) Dataverse Plugin adds data sharing and preservation to the OJS publication process.

https://github.com/pkp/ojs/tree/ojs-stable-2_4_6/plugins/generic/dataverse

Python
------

OSF
~~~

Allows you to view, download, and upload files to and from a Dataverse dataset from an Open Science Framework (OSF) project: https://osf.io/getting-started/#dataverse

https://github.com/CenterForOpenScience/osf.io/tree/master/website/addons/dataverse

GeoConnect
~~~~~~~~~~

GeoConnect allows Dataverse files to be visualized on http://worldmap.harvard.edu with the "Explore" button. Read more about it in the :doc:`/user/data-exploration/worldmap` section of the User Guide.

https://github.com/IQSS/geoconnect

Java
----

Dataverse for Android
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For now this is only a proof of concept.

https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse-android

Commit message:

add page for integrations to Admin Guide #4283

doc/sphinx-guides/source/api/apps.rst, after:

Apps
====

The introduction of Dataverse APIs has fostered the development of apps that are listed at http://dataverse.org/integrations and the :doc:`/admin/integrations` section of the Admin Guide.

The apps below are open source, demonstrating how to use Dataverse APIs. Some of these apps (and others) are built on :doc:`/api/client-libraries` that are available for Dataverse APIs.

.. contents:: |toctitle|
	:local:

Javascript
----------

TwoRavens
~~~~~~~~~

TwoRavens is a system of interlocking statistical tools for data exploration, analysis, and meta-analysis.

https://github.com/IQSS/TwoRavens

PHP
---

OJS
~~~

The Open Journal Systems (OJS) Dataverse Plugin adds data sharing and preservation to the OJS publication process.

https://github.com/pkp/ojs/tree/ojs-stable-2_4_8/plugins/generic/dataverse

Python
------

OSF
~~~

Allows you to view, download, and upload files to and from a Dataverse dataset from an Open Science Framework (OSF) project: https://github.com/CenterForOpenScience/osf.io/tree/develop/addons/dataverse

GeoConnect
~~~~~~~~~~

GeoConnect allows Dataverse files to be visualized on http://worldmap.harvard.edu with the "Explore" button. Read more about it in the :doc:`/user/data-exploration/worldmap` section of the User Guide.

https://github.com/IQSS/geoconnect

Java
----

Dataverse for Android
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For now this is only a proof of concept.

https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse-android
