doc/sphinx-guides/source/index.rst, before:

.. Dataverse Documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Mon Jan 13 15:30:58 2014.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Dataverse 4.8.6 Guides
======================

These guides are for the most recent version of Dataverse. For the guides for **version 4.8.5** please go `here <http://guides.dataverse.org/en/4.8.5/>`_.

.. toctree::
  :glob:
  :titlesonly:
  :maxdepth: 2

  user/index
  admin/index
  api/index
  installation/index
  developers/index
  style/index

How the Guides Are Organized
=============================

The Guides are reference documents that explain how to use Dataverse,
which are divided into the following sections: User Guide,
Installation Guide, Developer Guide, and API Guide. The User Guide is further divided into primary activities: finding & using
data, adding Datasets, administering dataverses or Datasets, and Dataset exploration/visualizations. Details
on all of the above tasks can be found in the Users Guide. The
Installation Guide is for people or organizations who want to host their
own Dataverse. The Developer Guide contains instructions for
people who want to contribute to the Open Source Dataverse
project or who want to modify the code to suit their own needs. Finally, the API Guide is for
Developers that work on other applications and are interested in connecting with Dataverse through our APIs.

Other Resources
=========================

**Dataverse Project Site**

Additional information about the Dataverse Project itself
including presentations, information about upcoming releases, data
management and citation, and announcements can be found at
`http://dataverse.org/ <http://dataverse.org/>`__

**User Group**

As the user community grows we encourage people to shares ideas, ask
questions, or offer suggestions for improvement. Go to
`https://groups.google.com/group/dataverse-community <https://groups.google.com/group/dataverse-community>`__ to register to our dataverse community group.

**Follow Us on Twitter**

For up to date news, information and developments, follow our twitter account: `https://twitter.com/dataverseorg <https://twitter.com/dataverseorg>`__

**Support**

We maintain an email based support service that's free of charge. We
attempt to respond within one business day to all questions and if it
cannot be resolved immediately, we'll let you know what to expect.

The support email address is
`support@dataverse.org <mailto:support@dataverse.org>`__.

This is the same address as the Report Issue link. We try to respond
within one business day.


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`

Commit message:

Added documentation to only allow robots to crawl latest version of guides. Added new page listing all versions of guides. [ref #4476]

doc/sphinx-guides/source/index.rst, after:

.. Dataverse Documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Mon Jan 13 15:30:58 2014.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Dataverse |version| Guides
==========================

These guides are for the |version| version of Dataverse. To find guides belonging to previous versions, :ref:`guides_versions` has a list of all available versions.

.. toctree::
  :glob:
  :titlesonly:
  :maxdepth: 2

  user/index
  admin/index
  api/index
  installation/index
  developers/index
  style/index

How the Guides Are Organized
=============================

The Guides are reference documents that explain how to use Dataverse,
which are divided into the following sections: User Guide,
Installation Guide, Developer Guide, and API Guide. The User Guide is further divided into primary activities: finding & using
data, adding Datasets, administering dataverses or Datasets, and Dataset exploration/visualizations. Details
on all of the above tasks can be found in the Users Guide. The
Installation Guide is for people or organizations who want to host their
own Dataverse. The Developer Guide contains instructions for
people who want to contribute to the Open Source Dataverse
project or who want to modify the code to suit their own needs. Finally, the API Guide is for
Developers that work on other applications and are interested in connecting with Dataverse through our APIs.

Other Resources
=========================

**Dataverse Project Site**

Additional information about the Dataverse Project itself
including presentations, information about upcoming releases, data
management and citation, and announcements can be found at
`http://dataverse.org/ <http://dataverse.org/>`__

**User Group**

As the user community grows we encourage people to shares ideas, ask
questions, or offer suggestions for improvement. Go to
`https://groups.google.com/group/dataverse-community <https://groups.google.com/group/dataverse-community>`__ to register to our dataverse community group.

**Follow Us on Twitter**

For up to date news, information and developments, follow our twitter account: `https://twitter.com/dataverseorg <https://twitter.com/dataverseorg>`__

**Support**

We maintain an email based support service that's free of charge. We
attempt to respond within one business day to all questions and if it
cannot be resolved immediately, we'll let you know what to expect.

The support email address is
`support@dataverse.org <mailto:support@dataverse.org>`__.

This is the same address as the Report Issue link. We try to respond
within one business day.


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
