# Dataverse Software 5.8

This release brings new features, enhancements, and bug fixes to the Dataverse Software. Thank you to all of the community members who contributed code, suggestions, bug reports, and other assistance across the project.

## Release Highlights

### Support for Data Embargoes

Dataverse now supports file-level embargoes. The ability to set embargoes, up to a maximum duration (in months), can be configured by a Dataverse installation administrator. For more information, see the [Embargoes section](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.8/user/dataset-management.rst#embargoes) of the Dataverse Software Guides.

- Users can configure a specific embargo, defined by an end date and a short reason, on a set of selected files or an individual file, by selecting the 'Embargo' menu item and entering information in a popup dialog. Embargoes can only be set, changed, or removed before a file has been published. After publication, only Dataverse installation administrators can make changes, using an API.

- While embargoed, files cannot be previewed or downloaded (as if restricted, with no option to allow access requests). After the embargo expires, files become accessible. If the files were also restricted, they remain inaccessible and functionality is the same as for any restricted file.

- By default, the citation date reported for the dataset and the datafiles in version 1.0 reflects the longest embargo period on any file in version 1.0, which is consistent with recommended practice from DataCite. Administrators can still specify an alternate date field to be used in the citation date via the [Set Citation Date Field Type for a Dataset API Call](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.8/api/native-api.html#set-citation-date-field-type-for-a-dataset).

The work to add this functionality was initiated by Data Archiving and Networked Services (DANS-KNAW), the Netherlands. It was further developed by the Global Dataverse Community Consortium (GDCC) in cooperation with and with funding from DANS.

## Major Use Cases

Newly-supported major use cases in this release include:

- Users can set file-level embargoes. (Issue #7743, #4052, #343, PR #8020)

## Notes for Dataverse Installation Administrators

### Mitigate Solr Schema Management Problems

With [Release 5.5](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/releases/tag/v5.5), the `<copyField>` definitions had been reincluded into `schema.xml` to fix searching for datasets.

This release includes a final update to `schema.xml` and an updated script `update-fields.sh` to manage your custom metadata fields in the future, and to provide opportunities for other future improvements. The broken script `updateSchemaMDB.sh` has been removed.

You will need to replace your schema.xml with the one provided in order to make sure that the new script can function. If you do not use any custom metadata blocks in your installation, this is the only change to be made. If you do use custom metadata blocks you will need to take a few extra steps, enumerated in the step-by-step instructions below.

## New JVM Options and DB Settings

- :MaxEmbargoDurationInMonths controls whether embargoes are allowed in a Dataverse instance and can limit the maximum duration users are allowed to specify. A value of 0 months or non-existent setting indicates embargoes are not supported. A value of -1 allows embargoes of any length.

## Complete List of Changes

For the complete list of code changes in this release, see the [5.8 Milestone](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/milestone/99?closed=1) in Github.

For help with upgrading, installing, or general questions please post to the [Dataverse Community Google Group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/dataverse-community) or email support@dataverse.org.

## Installation

If this is a new installation, please see our [Installation Guide](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.8/installation/). Please also contact us to get added to the [Dataverse Project Map](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.8/installation/config.html#putting-your-dataverse-installation-on-the-map-at-dataverse-org) if you have not done so already.

## Upgrade Instructions

0\. These instructions assume that you've already successfully upgraded from Dataverse Software 4.x to Dataverse Software 5 following the instructions in the [Dataverse Software 5 Release Notes](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/releases/tag/v5.0). After upgrading from the 4.x series to 5.0, you should progress through the other 5.x releases before attempting the upgrade to 5.8.

If you are running Payara as a non-root user (and you should be!), **remember not to execute the commands below as root**. Use `sudo` to change to that user first. For example, `sudo -i -u dataverse` if `dataverse` is your dedicated application user.  

In the following commands we assume that Payara 5 is installed in `/usr/local/payara5`. If not, adjust as needed.

`export PAYARA=/usr/local/payara5`

(or `setenv PAYARA /usr/local/payara5` if you are using a `csh`-like shell)

1\. Undeploy the previous version.

- `$PAYARA/bin/asadmin list-applications`
- `$PAYARA/bin/asadmin undeploy dataverse<-version>`

2\. Stop Payara and remove the generated directory

- `service payara stop`
- `rm -rf $PAYARA/glassfish/domains/domain1/generated`

3\. Start Payara

- `service payara start`
  
4\. Deploy this version.

- `$PAYARA/bin/asadmin deploy dataverse-5.8.war`

5\. Restart payara

- `service payara stop`
- `service payara start`

## Additional Release Steps

1\. Replace Solr schema.xml. See specific instructions below for those installations without custom metadata blocks (1a) and those with (1b).

1a\.

For installations without Custom Metadata Blocks:

- stop Solr instance (usually service solr stop, depending on Solr installation/OS, see the [Installation Guide](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.8/installation/prerequisites.html#solr-init-script)

- replace schema.xml with the file included in this release

cp /tmp/dvinstall/schema.xml /usr/local/solr/solr-8.8.1/server/solr/collection1/conf

- start Solr instance (usually service solr start, depending on solr/OS)

2\. Run a full reindex, following the steps in the [Admin Guide](http://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.8/admin/solr-search-index.html).

1b\.

For installations with Custom Metadata Blocks:

- stop Solr instance (usually service solr stop, depending on Solr installation/OS, see the [Installation Guide](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.8/installation/prerequisites.html#solr-init-script)

- replace schema.xml

To include your custom metadata fields after updating schema.xml, you can use a simple `curl` command. Please download the script before or use it from the extracted installer.

```
curl "https://<your dataverse installation>/api/admin/index/solr/schema" | update-fields.sh conf/schema.xml
```

Please adapt the above to point to your Dataverse installation and to the correct `schema.xml` file in your Solr installation. See the [Installation Guide](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.8/installation/prerequisites.html#installing-solr) for some hints about usual places or use `find / -name schema.xml`)

cp /tmp/dvinstall/schema.xml /usr/local/solr/solr-8.8.1/server/solr/collection1/conf

- start Solr instance (usually service solr start, depending on solr/OS)