# Dataverse 6.2

Please note: To read these instructions in full, please go to https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/releases/tag/v6.3 rather than the list of releases, which will cut them off.

This release brings new features, enhancements, and bug fixes to the Dataverse software.
Thank you to all of the community members who contributed code, suggestions, bug reports, and other assistance across the project.

# Table of Contents
- [Release Highlights](#release-highlights)
- [Bug fixes](#bug-fixes)
- [Persistence](#persistence)
- [API](#api)
- [Settings](#settings)
- [Complete List of Changes](#complete-list-of-changes)
- [Getting Help](#getting-help)
- [Upgrade instructions](#upgrade-instructions)

## Release Highlights

### Sitemap Now Supports More Than 50k Items

Dataverse can now handle more than 50,000 items when generating sitemap files, splitting the content across multiple files to comply with the Sitemap protocol.

For details see https://dataverse-guide--10321.org.readthedocs.build/en/10321/installation/config.html#creating-a-sitemap-and-submitting-it-to-search-engines #8936 and #10321.

### Improved Use of Dataverse Thumbnail

Dataverse will use the Dataset thumbnail, if one is defined, rather than the generic Dataverse logo in the Open Graph metadata header. This means the image will be seen when, for example, the dataset is referenced on Facebook.

### Improved Controlled Vocabulary for Citation Block

The Controlled Vocabuary Values list for the metadata field Language in the Citation block has been improved, with some missing two- and three-letter ISO 639 codes added, as well as more alternative names for some of the languages, making all these extra language identifiers importable.

### Support for Rsync Has Been Deprecated

Support for rsync has been deprecated. Information has been removed from the guides for rsync and related software such as Data Capture Module (DCM) and Repository Storage Abstraction Layer (RSAL). You can still find this information in [older versions](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.2/developers/big-data-support.html#data-capture-module-dcm) of the guides.

[See.](#database-settings)

### Updates on Support for External Vocabulary Services

Multiple extensions of the External Vocabulary mechanism have been added. These extensions allow interaction with services based on the Ontoportal software and are expected to be generally useful for other service types.

These changes include:

- *Improved Indexing with Compound Fields:* When using an external vocabulary service with compound fields, you can now specify which field(s) will include additional indexed information, such as translations of an entry into other languages. This is done by adding the `indexIn` in `retrieval-filtering`. (#10505)
For more information, please check [GDCC/dataverse-external-vocab-support documentation](https://github.com/gdcc/dataverse-external-vocab-support/tree/main/docs).

- *Broader Support for Indexing Service Responses:* Indexing of the results from `retrieval-filtering` responses can now handle additional formats including Json Arrays of Strings and values from arbitrary keys within a JSON Object. (#10505)

- *HTTP Headers:* You are now able to add HTTP request headers required by the service you are implementing (#10331)

- *Flexible params in retrievalUri:* You can now use `managed-fields` field names as well as the `term-uri-field` field name as parameters in the `retrieval-uri` when configuring an external vocabulary service. `{0}` as an alternative to using the `term-uri-field` name is still supported for backward compatibility. Also you can specify if the value must be url encoded with `encodeUrl:`. (#10404). For example : `"retrieval-uri": "https://data.agroportal.lirmm.fr/ontologies/{keywordVocabulary}/classes/{encodeUrl:keywordermURL}"`

### URL Validation Is More Permissive

Url validation now allows two slashes in the path component of the URL. (#9750)
Among other things, this allows metadata fields of `url` type to be filled with more complex url such as https://archive.softwareheritage.org/browse/directory/561bfe6698ca9e58b552b4eb4e56132cac41c6f9/?origin_url=https://github.com/gem-pasteur/macsyfinder&revision=868637fce184865d8e0436338af66a2648e8f6e1&snapshot=1bde3cb370766b10132c4e004c7cb377979928d1

### Improved Detection of Ro-Crate Files

Detection of mime-types based on a filename with extension and detection of the RO-Crate metadata files.

From now on, filenames with extensions can be added into `MimeTypeDetectionByFileName.properties` file. Filenames added there will take precedence over simply recognizing files by extensions. For example, two new filenames are added into that file:
```
ro-crate-metadata.json=application/ld+json; profile="http://www.w3.org/ns/json-ld#flattened http://www.w3.org/ns/json-ld#compacted https://w3id.org/ro/crate"
ro-crate-metadata.jsonld=application/ld+json; profile="http://www.w3.org/ns/json-ld#flattened http://www.w3.org/ns/json-ld#compacted https://w3id.org/ro/crate"
```

Therefore, files named `ro-crate-metadata.json` will be then detected as RO-Crated metadata files from now on, instead as generic `JSON` files.
For more information on the RO-Crate specifications, see https://www.researchobject.org/ro-crate

### New S3 Tagging Configuration Option

If your S3 store does not support tagging and gives an error if you configure direct uploads, you can disable the tagging by using the ``dataverse.files.<id>.disable-tagging`` JVM option. For more details see https://dataverse-guide--10029.org.readthedocs.build/en/10029/developers/big-data-support.html#s3-tags #10022 and #10029.

[See](#new-configuration-options)

### File Retention Period

The Dataverse Software now supports file-level retention periods. The ability to set retention periods, with a minimum duration (in months), can be configured by a Dataverse installation administrator. For more information, see the [Retention Periods section](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.3/user/dataset-management.html#retention-periods) of the Dataverse Software Guides.

- Users can configure a specific retention period, defined by an end date and a short reason, on a set of selected files or an individual file, by selecting the 'Retention Period' menu item and entering information in a popup dialog. Retention Periods can only be set, changed, or removed before a file has been published. After publication, only Dataverse installation administrators can make changes, using an API.

- After the retention period expires, files can not be previewed or downloaded (as if restricted, with no option to allow access requests). The file (landing) page and all the metadata remains available.

### Feature Flag To Remove the Required “Reason” Field in the “Return to Author” Dialog

A reason field, that is required to not be empty, was added in v6.2. Installations that handle author communications through email or another system may prefer to not be required to use this new field. v6.2 includes a new 
disable-return-to-author-reason feature flag that can be enabled to drop the reason field from the dialog and make sending a reason optional in the api/datasets/{id}/returnToAuthor call. 

### New keywordTermURI Metadata Field in the Citation Metadata Block

A new metadata field - `keywordTermURI`, has been added in the citation metadata block (as a fourth child field under the `keyword` parent field). This has been done to improve usability and to facilitate the integration of controlled vocabulary services, adding the possibility of saving the "term" and/or its associated URI. For more information, see #10288 and PR #10371.

### Updated Computational Workflow Metadata Block

The computational workflow metadata block has been updated to present a clickable link for the External Code Repository URL field.

### Large Datasets Improvements

For scenarios involving API calls related to large datasets (Numerous files, for example: ~10k) it has been optimized:

- The search API endpoint.
- The permission checking logic present in PermissionServiceBean.

### MIT and Apache 2.0 Licenses Added

A new file has been added to import the MIT and Apache 2.0 Licenses to Dataverse: 

- licenseMIT.json
- licenseApache-2.0.json

Guidance has been added to the [guides](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.2/installation/config.html#adding-custom-licenses) to explain the procedure for adding new licenses to Dataverse.

### Metadata Source Facet Added

An option has been added to index the name of the Harvesting Client as the "Metadata Source" of harvested datasets and files; if enabled, the Metadata Source facet will be showing separate entries for the content harvested from different sources, instead of the current, default behavior where there is one "Harvested" facet for all such content.

Tho enable this feature, set the optional feature flage (jvm option) `dataverse.feature.index-harvested-metadata-source=true` before reindexing.

### Datalad Integration With Dataverse

DataLad has been integrated with Dataverse. For more information, [see.](https://dataverse-guide--10470.org.readthedocs.build/en/10470/admin/integrations.html#datalad)

### Solr Search and Indexing Improvements

Multiple improvements have ben made to they way Solr indexing and searching is done. Response times should be significantly improved.

- Two experimental features flag called "add-publicobject-solr-field" and "avoid-expensive-solr-join" have been added to change how Solr documents are indexed for public objects and how Solr queries are constructed to accommodate access to restricted content (drafts, etc.). It is hoped that it will help with performance, especially on large instances and under load.

- Before the search feature flag ("avoid-expensive...") can be turned on, the indexing flag must be enabled, and a full reindex performed. Otherwise publicly available objects are NOT going to be shown in search results.

- A features flag called "reduce-solr-deletes" has been added to improve how datafiles are indexed. When the flag is enabled, 
Dataverse wil avoid pre-emptively deleting existing solr documents for the files prior to sending updated information. This
should improve performance and will allow additional optimizations going forward.

- The /api/admin/index/status and /api/admin/index/clear-orphans calls
(see https://guides.dataverse.org/en/latest/admin/solr-search-index.html#index-and-database-consistency)
will now find and remove (respectively) additional permissions related solr documents that were not being detected before.
Reducing the overall number of documents will improve solr performance and large sites may wish to periodically call the 
clear-orphans API.

### 3D Viewer by Open Forest Data

3DViewer by openforestdata.pl has been added to the list of external tools: https://preview.guides.gdcc.io/en/develop/admin/external-tools.html#inventory-of-external-tools

### Additional Facet Settings

Extra settings have been added giving an instance admin more choices in selectively limiting the availability of search facets on the Collection and Dataset pages. 

See the [Disable Solr Facets](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.3/installation/config.html#DisableSolrFacets) sections of the Config Guide for more info.

### Hidden HTML Fields

External Controlled Vocabulary scripts, configured via [:CVocConf](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.3/installation/config.html#cvocconf), can now access the values of managed fields as well as the term-uri-field for use in constructing the metadata view for a dataset.

Those values are hidden and can be found with the html attribute `data-cvoc-metadata-name`.

For more information, see [#10503](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/pull/10503).

[↑ Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

## Bug Fixes

### Re-Addition of ‘Cell Counting’ to Life Science Block

Re-adding value `cell counting` to Life Science metadata block's Measurement Type vocabularies accidentally removed in `v5.1`. 

### Incomplete Metadata Bug Fix

Bug fixed for the ``incomplete metadata`` label being shown for published dataset with incomplete metadata in certain scenarios. This label will now be shown for draft versions of such datasets and published datasets that the user can edit. This label can also be made invisible for published datasets (regardless of edit rights) with the new option ``dataverse.ui.show-validity-label-when-published`` set to `false`.

### Identical Role Error Message

An error is now correctly reported when an attempt is made to assign an identical role to the same collection, dataset, or file. #9729 #10465

### OpenAPI Re-Enabled

In Dataverse 6.0 when Payara was updated it caused the url `/openapi` to stop working:

- https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/issues/9981
- https://github.com/payara/Payara/issues/6369

Additionally to the fix of the URL on this release we are also making some changes on how we provide the OpenAPI document:

When it worked in Dataverse 5.x, the `/openapi` output was generated automatically by Payara, but in this release we have switched to OpenAPI output produced by the [SmallRye OpenAPI plugin](https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-open-api/tree/main/tools/maven-plugin). This gives us finer control over the output.

For more information, see the section on  [OpenAPI](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.3/getting-started.html#openapi) in the API Guide.

### Math Challenge Fixed on 403 Error Page

On forbidden access error page, also know as 403 error page, the math challenge is now correctly display to submit the contact form.

### Ingest Option Bug Fixed 

A bug that prevented the Ingest option in the File page Edit File menu from working has been fixed

[↑ Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

## Persistence
[↑ Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

## API 

### Superuser Endpoint

The existing API endpoint for toggling the superuser status of a user has been deprecated in favor of a new API endpoint that allows you to explicitly and idempotently set the status as true or false. For details, see [the guides](https://dataverse-guide--10440.org.readthedocs.build/en/10440/api/native-api.html), #9887 and #10440.

### New Featured Collections Endpoints

New api endpoints have been added to allow you to add or remove featured collections from a dataverse collection.

### Dataset Version Endpoint Extended
The API endpoint for getting the Dataset version has been extended to include latestVersionPublishingStatus.

### New Optional Query Parameters for Metadatablocks Endpoints

New optional query parameters added to ``api/metadatablocks`` and ``api/dataverses/{id}/metadatablocks`` endpoints:

- ``returnDatasetFieldTypes``: Whether or not to return the dataset field types present in each metadata block. If not set, the default value is false.
- Setting the query parameter ``onlyDisplayedOnCreate=true`` also returns metadata blocks with dataset field type input levels configured as required on the General Information page of the collection, in addition to the metadata blocks and their fields with the property ``displayOnCreate=true``.

### MetadataBlock and DatasetFieldType Payloads Extended

Added new ``displayOnCreate`` field to the MetadataBlock and DatasetFieldType payloads.

### Dataverse Payload Includes Release Status

The Dataverse object returned by /api/dataverses has been extended to include "isReleased": {boolean}.

### New Field Type Input Level Endpoint 

A new endpoint ``api/dataverses/{id}/inputLevels`` has been created for updating the dataset field type input levels of a collection via API.

### Banner Message Endpoint Extended

The endpoint `api/admin/bannerMessage` has been extended so the ID is returned when created

[↑ Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

## Settings 

### Database Settings:

***Deprecated:***

- :DataCaptureModuleUrl
- :DownloadMethods
- :LocalDataAccessPath
- :RepositoryStorageAbstractionLayerUrl

### New configuration options

- dataverse.files.<id>.disable-tagging

[↑ Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

## Complete List of Changes

For the complete list of code changes in this release, see the [6.3 Milestone](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/issues?q=milestone%3A6.3+is%3Aclosed) in GitHub.

[↑ Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

## Getting Help

For help with upgrading, installing, or general questions please post to the [Dataverse Community Google Group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/dataverse-community) or email support@dataverse.org.

[↑ Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

## Upgrade Instructions

Upgrading requires a maintenance window and downtime. Please plan accordingly, create backups of your database, etc.

These instructions assume that you've already upgraded through all the 5.x releases and are now running Dataverse 6.2.

0\. These instructions assume that you are upgrading from the immediate previous version. If you are running an earlier version, the only safe way to upgrade is to progress through the upgrades to all the releases in between before attempting the upgrade to this version.

If you are running Payara as a non-root user (and you should be!), **remember not to execute the commands below as root**. Use `sudo` to change to that user first. For example, `sudo -i -u dataverse` if `dataverse` is your dedicated application user.

In the following commands, we assume that Payara 6 is installed in `/usr/local/payara6`. If not, adjust as needed.

`export PAYARA=/usr/local/payara6`

(or `setenv PAYARA /usr/local/payara6` if you are using a `csh`-like shell)

1\. Undeploy the previous version.

- `$PAYARA/bin/asadmin undeploy dataverse-6.2`

2\. Stop Payara and remove the generated directory

- `service payara stop`
- `rm -rf $PAYARA/glassfish/domains/domain1/generated`

3\. Start Payara

- `service payara start`

4\. Deploy this version.

- `$PAYARA/bin/asadmin deploy dataverse-6.3.war`

5\. For installations with internationalization:

- Please remember to update translations via [Dataverse language packs](https://github.com/GlobalDataverseCommunityConsortium/dataverse-language-packs).

6\. Restart Payara

- `service payara stop`
- `service payara start`

7\. Update the following Metadata Blocks to reflect the incremental improvements made to the handling of core metadata fields: 

 ```
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/IQSS/dataverse/v6.3/scripts/api/data/metadatablocks/citation.tsv

curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/datasetfield/load -H "Content-type: text/tab-separated-values" -X POST --upload-file citation.tsv

wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/IQSS/dataverse/v6.3/scripts/api/data/metadatablocks/biomedical.tsv

curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/datasetfield/load -H "Content-type: text/tab-separated-values" -X POST --upload-file biomedical.tsv

wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/IQSS/dataverse/v6.3/scripts/api/data/metadatablocks/computational_workflow.tsv

curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/datasetfield/load -H "Content-type: text/tab-separated-values" -X POST --upload-file computational_workflow.tsv

```

8\. For installations with custom or experimental metadata blocks:

- Stop Solr instance (usually `service solr stop`, depending on Solr installation/OS, see the [Installation Guide](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.3/installation/prerequisites.html#solr-init-script))

- Run the `update-fields.sh` script that we supply, as in the example below (modify the command lines as needed to reflect the correct path of your solr installation):
```
	wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/IQSS/dataverse/v6.3/conf/solr/update-fields.sh
	chmod +x update-fields.sh
	curl "http://localhost:8080/api/admin/index/solr/schema" | ./update-fields.sh /usr/local/solr/solr-9.4.1/server/solr/collection1/conf/schema.xml
```
     
- Restart Solr instance (usually `service solr restart` depending on solr/OS)

9\. Enable the Metadata Source Facet (Optional)

If you choose to enable the extended "Metadata Source" facet for harvested content, set the optional feature flag (jvm option) `dataverse.feature.index-harvested-metadata-source=true` before reindexing.

10\. Reindex Solr:

   For details, see https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.3/admin/solr-search-index.html but here is the reindex command:

```
   curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/index
```

## Notes for Dataverse Installation Administrators

### Data migration to the new `keywordTermURI` field

You can migrate your `keywordValue` data containing URIs to the new `keywordTermURI` field.
In case of data migration, view the affected data with the following database query:

```
SELECT value FROM datasetfieldvalue dfv
INNER JOIN datasetfield df ON df.id = dfv.datasetfield_id 
WHERE df.datasetfieldtype_id = (SELECT id FROM datasetfieldtype WHERE name = 'keywordValue')
AND value ILIKE 'http%';
```

If you wish to migrate your data, a database update is then necessary:

```
UPDATE datasetfield df
SET datasetfieldtype_id  = (SELECT id FROM datasetfieldtype WHERE name = 'keywordTermURI')
FROM datasetfieldvalue dfv
WHERE dfv.datasetfield_id  = df.id 
AND df.datasetfieldtype_id = (SELECT id FROM datasetfieldtype WHERE name = 'keywordValue')
AND dfv.value ILIKE 'http%';
```

A ['Reindex in Place'](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/latest/admin/solr-search-index.html#reindex-in-place) will be required and ReExportAll will need to be run to update the metadata exports of the dataset. Follow the directions in the [Admin Guide](http://guides.dataverse.org/en/latest/admin/metadataexport.html#batch-exports-through-the-api).

## Upgrade Payara to v6.2024.6

With this version of Dataverse, we encourage you to upgrade to version 6.2024.6.
This will address security issues accumulated since the release of 6.2023.8, which was required since Dataverse release 6.0.

### Instructions for Upgrading

If you are using GDCC containers, this upgrade is included when pulling new release images.
No manual intervention is necessary.

We recommend you ensure you followed all update instructions from the past releases regarding Payara.
(Latest Payara update was for [v6.0](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/releases/tag/v6.0))

Upgrading requires a maintenance window and downtime. Please plan ahead, create backups of your database, etc.

The steps below are a simple matter of reusing your existing domain directory with the new distribution.
But we also recommend that you review the Payara upgrade instructions as it could be helpful during any troubleshooting:
[Payara Release Notes](https://docs.payara.fish/community/docs/Release%20Notes/Release%20Notes%206.2024.6.html)
We assume you are already on a Dataverse 6.x installation, using a Payara 6.x release.

```shell
export PAYARA=/usr/local/payara6
```

(or `setenv PAYARA /usr/local/payara6` if you are using a `csh`-like shell)

1\. Undeploy the previous version

```shell
    $PAYARA/bin/asadmin list-applications
    $PAYARA/bin/asadmin undeploy dataverse<-version>
```

2\. Stop Payara

```shell
    service payara stop
    rm -rf $PAYARA/glassfish/domains/domain1/generated
    rm -rf $PAYARA/glassfish/domains/domain1/osgi-cache
    rm -rf $PAYARA/glassfish/domains/domain1/lib/databases
```

3\. Move the current Payara directory out of the way

```shell
    mv $PAYARA $PAYARA.MOVED
```

4\. Download the new Payara version (6.2024.6), and unzip it in its place

5\. Replace the brand new payara/glassfish/domains/domain1 with your old, preserved domain1

6\. Make sure that you have the following `--add-opens` options in your domain.xml. If not present, add them:

```diff
--- payara-6.2023.8/glassfish/domains/domain1/config/domain.xml
+++ payara-6.2024.6/glassfish/domains/domain1/config/domain.xml
@@ -212,12 +212,16 @@
                 <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.naming/javax.naming.spi=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.rmi/sun.rmi.transport=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.logging/java.util.logging=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
+                <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.management/javax.management=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
+                <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.management/javax.management.openmbean=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-exports=java.base/sun.net.www=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-exports=java.base/sun.security.util=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-opens=java.base/java.lang.invoke=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-opens=java.desktop/java.beans=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-exports=jdk.naming.dns/com.sun.jndi.dns=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-exports=java.naming/com.sun.jndi.ldap=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
+                <jvm-options>[17|]--add-opens=java.base/java.io=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
+                <jvm-options>[21|]--add-opens=java.base/jdk.internal.misc=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>-Xmx512m</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>-XX:NewRatio=2</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>-XX:+UnlockDiagnosticVMOptions</jvm-options>
@@ -447,12 +451,16 @@
                 <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.naming/javax.naming.spi=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.rmi/sun.rmi.transport=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.logging/java.util.logging=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
+                <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.management/javax.management=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
+                <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.management/javax.management.openmbean=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-exports=java.base/sun.net.www=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-exports=java.base/sun.security.util=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-opens=java.base/java.lang.invoke=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-opens=java.desktop/java.beans=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-exports=jdk.naming.dns/com.sun.jndi.dns=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>[17|]--add-exports=java.naming/com.sun.jndi.ldap=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
+                <jvm-options>[17|]--add-opens=java.base/java.io=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
+                <jvm-options>[21|]--add-opens=java.base/jdk.internal.misc=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>-Xmx512m</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>-XX:NewRatio=2</jvm-options>
                 <jvm-options>-XX:+UnlockDiagnosticVMOptions</jvm-options>
```
(You can also save this as a patch file and try to apply it.)

TODO: For the combined 6.3 release note, I would consider replacing the patch format above with just the 4 specific options, for clarity etc. (L.A.) As in: 
```
         <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.management/javax.management=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
         <jvm-options>--add-opens=java.management/javax.management.openmbean=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
         <jvm-options>[17|]--add-opens=java.base/java.io=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
         <jvm-options>[21|]--add-opens=java.base/jdk.internal.misc=ALL-UNNAMED</jvm-options>
```

7\. Start Payara

```shell
    service payara start
```

8\. Deploy this version.

```shell
    $PAYARA/bin/asadmin deploy dataverse-6.3.war
```

9\. Restart payara

```shell
    service payara stop
    service payara start
```

[↑ Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
