modules/container-configbaker/README.md, before:

# Config Baker

The Config Baker container may be used to execute all sorts of tasks around setting up, preparing and finalizing
an instance of the Dataverse software. Its focus is bootstrapping non-initialized installations.

You may use this image as is, base your own derivative image on it or use bind mounts to change behavior.

## Quick Reference

**Maintained by:** 

This image is created, maintained and supported by the Dataverse community on a best-effort basis.

**Where to find documentation:**

The [Dataverse Container Guide - Config Baker Image](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/latest/container/configbaker-image.html)
provides information about this image. 

**Where to get help and ask questions:**

IQSS will not offer support on how to deploy or run it. Please reach out to the community for help on using it.
You can join the Community Chat on Matrix at https://chat.dataverse.org and https://groups.google.com/g/dataverse-community
to ask for help and guidance.

## Supported Image Tags

This image is sourced within the main upstream code [repository of the Dataverse software](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse).
Development and maintenance of the [image's code](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/tree/develop/modules/container-configbaker)
happens there (again, by the community). Community-supported image tags are based on the two most important branches:

- The `unstable` tag corresponds to the `develop` branch, where pull requests are merged.
  ([`Dockerfile`](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/tree/develop/modules/container-configbaker/src/main/docker/Dockerfile))
- The `alpha` tag corresponds to the `master` branch, where releases are cut from.
  ([`Dockerfile`](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/tree/master/modules/container-configbaker/src/main/docker/Dockerfile))

## License

Image content created by the community is licensed under [Apache License, Version 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0), 
like the [main Dataverse project](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/blob/develop/LICENSE.md).

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. 
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

As for any pre-built image usage, it is the image user's responsibility to ensure that any use of this image complies
with any relevant licenses for all software contained within.

Commit message:

doc,ci(ct): enable ConfigBaker image DockerHub description maintenance
Activate ConfigBaker image workflow in GitHub Actions for automated rendering, tagging, and DockerHub updates. Reintegrated and refined previously commented-out sections to ensure compatibility with multi-arch builds and improved tagging policy. This improves maintainability, ensures regular updates, and enhances support for production use cases.

modules/container-configbaker/README.md, after:

# Config Baker

The Config Baker container may be used to execute all sorts of tasks around setting up, preparing and finalizing
an instance of the Dataverse software. Its focus is bootstrapping non-initialized installations.

You may use this image as is, base your own derivative image on it or use bind mounts to change behavior.

## Quick Reference

**Maintained by:** 

This image is created, maintained and supported by the Dataverse community on a best-effort basis.

**Where to find documentation:**

The [Dataverse Container Guide - Config Baker Image](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/latest/container/configbaker-image.html)
provides information about this image. 

**Where to get help and ask questions:**

IQSS will not offer support on how to deploy or run it. Please reach out to the community for help on using it.
You can join the Community Chat on Matrix at https://chat.dataverse.org and https://groups.google.com/g/dataverse-community
to ask for help and guidance.

## Supported Image Tags

## Supported Image Tags

This image is sourced within the main upstream code [repository of the Dataverse software](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse).
Development and maintenance of the [image's code](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/tree/develop/modules/container-configbaker) happens there (again, by the community).

Our tagging is inspired by [Bitnami](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-Tanzu-Application-Catalog/services/tutorials/GUID-understand-rolling-tags-containers-index.html).
For more detailed information about our tagging policy, please read about our [config baker image tags](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/latest/container/configbaker-image.html#supported-image-tags) in the Dataverse Containers Guide.

For ease of use, here is a list of images that are currently maintained.

<!-- TAG BLOCK HERE -->

All of them are rolling tags, except those ending with `-r<number>`, which are the most recent immutable tags.
The `unstable` tags are the current development branch snapshot.
We strongly recommend using only immutable tags for production use cases.

Within the main repository, you may find the image's files at `<git root>/modules/container-configbaker`.
This Maven module uses the [Maven Docker Plugin](https://dmp.fabric8.io) to build and ship the image.
You may use, extend, or alter this image to your liking and/or host in some different registry if you want to.

**Supported architectures:** This image is created as a "multi-arch image", supporting the most common architectures
Dataverse usually runs on: AMD64 (Windows/Linux/...) and ARM64 (Apple M1/M2).

## License

Image content created by the community is licensed under [Apache License, Version 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0), 
like the [main Dataverse project](https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/blob/develop/LICENSE.md).

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. 
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

As for any pre-built image usage, it is the image user's responsibility to ensure that any use of this image complies
with any relevant licenses for all software contained within.
