Replication Guidelines
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

1. **Preparing data for replication:**
What should be included and considered to ensure proper data replication?

  a)  Add all relevant Cataloging Information in a replication study in your Dataverse.

   * Publication citation: Including a permanent link to the original publication based on the data, since most likely the article will be in a journal that requires subscription. If no subscription required, a text file of the article can be included in the Dataverse dataset as part of the Documentation.
   * Data Citation Details:
      * Title of the dataset (will be added to data citation)
      * Author(s) (will be added to data citation)
      * Production date
      * Contact information
   * Description and Scope
      * Description/abstract taken directly from your publication.
      * Keywords
   * Data Collection / Methodology
   * Dataset Availability: Rights of first publication: When will my data be available for others to access (embargo)? If there is an embargo, include a specific date for when the research data will be available for others to replicate.
   * License (e.g., CC0) and/or Terms of Use: Who will have access to my data?

  b)  Add all relevant files (Research Data, Documentation and Analysis Files) in a replication dataset in your Dataverse.

   * List of code, scripts, documents and data files that are needed in order to make replication possible. 
   * Create a replication dataset: 
      * Deposit preferred or commonly used file formats in your discipline to ensure that others will be able to more easily replicate your research. Please remember to remove information from your datasets that must remain confidential (ex. names of survey respondents). For **Astronomy/Astrophysics**: FITS files with image metadata stored in a human-readable ASCII header. For the **Social Sciences**: Original SPSS, STATA, R files, csv, etc with variable names and description.
   * Sets of computer program recodes (if needed).
   * Program commands, code or script for analysis (if needed).
   * Extracts of existing publicly available data (or very clear directions for how to obtain exactly the same ones you used).
   * Documentation files (full set of supporting documentation)
       * “readme” file (explanatory document on how to use the files to replicate the study)
       * Text/pdf file of the article (if no subscription required).
       * Include a list of links to software or newly generated software used to replicate the data (see Gary King's website for examples).
       * Codebook
       * Data collection instruments
       * Summary statistics
       * Project summaries
       * Bibliographies of publications pertaining to the data

2. **Citing for replication**

Use the data citation generated by your Dataverse and add it as the first footnote or in the References within your publication to indicate where researchers can access your replication data. The persistent URL (ex. http://dx.doi.org/...) will link to a specific dataset in your Dataverse, and the dataset will contain everything needed for replication.