doc/sphinx-guides/source/developers/big-data-support.rst, before:

Big Data Support
================

Big data support is highly experimental. Eventually this content will move to the Installation Guide.

.. contents:: |toctitle|
        :local:

Various components need to be installed and configured for big data support.

Data Capture Module (DCM)
-------------------------

Data Capture Module (DCM) is an experimental component that allows users to upload large datasets via rsync over ssh.

Install a DCM
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Installation instructions can be found at https://github.com/sbgrid/data-capture-module/blob/master/doc/installation.md. Note that shared storage (posix or AWS S3) between Dataverse and your DCM is required. You cannot use a DCM with Swift at this point in time.

.. FIXME: Explain what ``dataverse.files.dcm-s3-bucket-name`` is for and what it has to do with ``dataverse.files.s3-bucket-name``.

Once you have installed a DCM, you will need to configure two database settings on the Dataverse side. These settings are documented in the :doc:`/installation/config` section of the Installation Guide:

- ``:DataCaptureModuleUrl`` should be set to the URL of a DCM you installed.
- ``:UploadMethods`` should include ``dcm/rsync+ssh``.
  
This will allow your Dataverse installation to communicate with your DCM, so that Dataverse can download rsync scripts for your users.

Downloading rsync scripts via Dataverse API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The rsync script can be downloaded from Dataverse via API using an authorized API token. In the curl example below, substitute ``$PERSISTENT_ID`` with a DOI or Handle:

``curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" $DV_BASE_URL/api/datasets/:persistentId/dataCaptureModule/rsync?persistentId=$PERSISTENT_ID``

How a DCM reports checksum success or failure to Dataverse
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the user uploads files to a DCM, that DCM will perform checksum validation and report to Dataverse the results of that validation. The DCM must be configured to pass the API token of a superuser. The implementation details, which are subject to change, are below.

The JSON that a DCM sends to Dataverse on successful checksum validation looks something like the contents of :download:`checksumValidationSuccess.json <../_static/installation/files/root/big-data-support/checksumValidationSuccess.json>` below:

.. literalinclude:: ../_static/installation/files/root/big-data-support/checksumValidationSuccess.json
   :language: json

- ``status`` - The valid strings to send are ``validation passed`` and ``validation failed``.
- ``uploadFolder`` - This is the directory on disk where Dataverse should attempt to find the files that a DCM has moved into place. There should always be a ``files.sha`` file and a least one data file. ``files.sha`` is a manifest of all the data files and their checksums. The ``uploadFolder`` directory is inside the directory where data is stored for the dataset and may have the same name as the "identifier" of the persistent id (DOI or Handle). For example, you would send ``"uploadFolder": "DNXV2H"`` in the JSON file when the absolute path to this directory is ``/usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/files/10.5072/FK2/DNXV2H/DNXV2H``.
- ``totalSize`` - Dataverse will use this value to represent the total size in bytes of all the files in the "package" that's created. If 360 data files and one ``files.sha`` manifest file are in the ``uploadFolder``, this value is the sum of the 360 data files.


Here's the syntax for sending the JSON.

``curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST -H 'Content-type: application/json' --upload-file checksumValidationSuccess.json $DV_BASE_URL/api/datasets/:persistentId/dataCaptureModule/checksumValidation?persistentId=$PERSISTENT_ID``


Steps to set up a DCM mock for Development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See instructions at https://github.com/sbgrid/data-capture-module/blob/master/doc/mock.md


Add Dataverse settings to use mock (same as using DCM, noted above):

- ``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:DataCaptureModuleUrl -X PUT -d "http://localhost:5000"``
- ``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:UploadMethods -X PUT -d "dcm/rsync+ssh"``

At this point you should be able to download a placeholder rsync script. Dataverse is then waiting for news from the DCM about if checksum validation has succeeded or not. First, you have to put files in place, which is usually the job of the DCM. You should substitute "X1METO" for the "identifier" of the dataset you create. You must also use the proper path for where you store files in your dev environment.

- ``mkdir /usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/files/10.5072/FK2/X1METO``
- ``mkdir /usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/files/10.5072/FK2/X1METO/X1METO``
- ``cd /usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/files/10.5072/FK2/X1METO/X1METO``
- ``echo "hello" > file1.txt``
- ``shasum file1.txt > files.sha``



Now the files are in place and you need to send JSON to Dataverse with a success or failure message as described above. Make a copy of ``doc/sphinx-guides/source/_static/installation/files/root/big-data-support/checksumValidationSuccess.json`` and put the identifier in place such as "X1METO" under "uploadFolder"). Then use curl as described above to send the JSON.

Troubleshooting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following low level command should only be used when troubleshooting the "import" code a DCM uses but is documented here for completeness.

``curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST "$DV_BASE_URL/api/batch/jobs/import/datasets/files/$DATASET_DB_ID?uploadFolder=$UPLOAD_FOLDER&totalSize=$TOTAL_SIZE"``

Steps to set up a DCM via Docker for Development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you need a fully operating DCM client for development purposes, these steps will guide you to setting one up. This includes steps to set up the DCM on S3 variant.

Docker Image Set-up
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

See https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/blob/develop/conf/docker-dcm/readme.txt

- Install docker if you do not have it
      
Optional steps for setting up the S3 Docker DCM Variant
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Before: the default bucket for DCM to hold files in S3 is named test-dcm. It is coded into `post_upload_s3.bash` (line 30). Change to a different bucket if needed.

  - Add AWS bucket info to dcmsrv
    - Add AWS credentials to ``~/.aws/credentials``
      - ``[default]``
      - ``aws_access_key_id =``
      - ``aws_secret_access_key =``

- Dataverse configuration (on dvsrv):

  - Set S3 as the storage driver

    - ``cd /opt/glassfish4/bin/``
    - ``./asadmin delete-jvm-options "\-Ddataverse.files.storage-driver-id=file"``
    - ``./asadmin create-jvm-options "\-Ddataverse.files.storage-driver-id=s3"``

  - Add AWS bucket info to Dataverse
    - Add AWS credentials to ``~/.aws/credentials``
      - ``[default]``
      - ``aws_access_key_id =``
      - ``aws_secret_access_key =``

    - Also: set region in ``~/.aws/config`` to create a region file. Add these contents:

      - ``[default]``
      - ``region = us-east-1``

  - Add the S3 bucket names to Dataverse

    - S3 bucket for Dataverse

      - ``/usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/bin/asadmin create-jvm-options "-Ddataverse.files.s3-bucket-name=iqsstestdcmbucket"``

    - S3 bucket for DCM (as Dataverse needs to do the copy over)

      - ``/usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/bin/asadmin create-jvm-options "-Ddataverse.files.dcm-s3-bucket-name=test-dcm"``

  - Set download method to be HTTP, as DCM downloads through S3 are over this protocol ``curl -X PUT "http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:DownloadMethods" -d "native/http"``

Using the DCM Docker Containers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For using these commands, you will need to connect to the shell prompt inside various containers (e.g. ``docker exec -it dvsrv /bin/bash``)

- Create a dataset and download rsync upload script

  - connect to client container: ``docker exec -it dcm_client bash``
  - create dataset: ``cd /mnt ; ./create.bash`` ; this will echo the database ID to stdout
  - download transfer script: ``./get_transfer.bash $database_id_from_create_script``
  - execute the transfer script: ``bash ./upload-${database_id_from-create_script}.bash`` , and follow instructions from script.

- Run script

  - e.g. ``bash ./upload-3.bash`` (``3`` being the database id from earlier commands in this example).

- Manually run post upload script on dcmsrv

  - for posix implementation: ``docker exec -it dcmsrv /opt/dcm/scn/post_upload.bash``
  - for S3 implementation: ``docker exec -it dcmsrv /opt/dcm/scn/post_upload_s3.bash``

Additional DCM docker development tips
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- You can completely blow away all the docker images with these commands (including non DCM ones!)
  - ``docker-compose -f docmer-compose.yml down -v``

- There are a few logs to tail

  - dvsrv : ``tail -n 2000 -f /opt/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/logs/server.log``
  - dcmsrv : ``tail -n 2000 -f /var/log/lighttpd/breakage.log``
  - dcmsrv : ``tail -n 2000 -f /var/log/lighttpd/access.log``

- You may have to restart the glassfish domain occasionally to deal with memory filling up. If deployment is getting reallllllly slow, its a good time.

Repository Storage Abstraction Layer (RSAL)
-------------------------------------------

Configuring the RSAL Mock
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Info for configuring the RSAL Mock: https://github.com/sbgrid/rsal/tree/master/mocks

Also, to configure Dataverse to use the new workflow you must do the following (see also the :doc:`workflows` section):

1. Configure the RSAL URL:

``curl -X PUT -d 'http://<myipaddr>:5050' http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:RepositoryStorageAbstractionLayerUrl``

2. Update workflow json with correct URL information:

Edit internal-httpSR-workflow.json and replace url and rollbackUrl to be the url of your RSAL mock.

3. Create the workflow:

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/workflows -X POST --data-binary @internal-httpSR-workflow.json -H "Content-type: application/json"``

4. List available workflows:

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/workflows``

5. Set the workflow (id) as the default workflow for the appropriate trigger:

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/workflows/default/PrePublishDataset -X PUT -d 2``

6. Check that the trigger has the appropriate default workflow set:

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/workflows/default/PrePublishDataset``

7. Add RSAL to whitelist

8. When finished testing, unset the workflow:

``curl -X DELETE http://localhost:8080/api/admin/workflows/default/PrePublishDataset``

Configuring download via rsync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to see the rsync URLs, you must run this command:

``curl -X PUT -d 'rsal/rsync' http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:DownloadMethods``

..  TODO: Document these in the Installation Guide once they're final.

To specify replication sites that appear in rsync URLs:

Download :download:`add-storage-site.json <../../../../scripts/api/data/storageSites/add-storage-site.json>` and adjust it to meet your needs. The file should look something like this:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../scripts/api/data/storageSites/add-storage-site.json

Then add the storage site using curl:

``curl -H "Content-type:application/json" -X POST http://localhost:8080/api/admin/storageSites --upload-file add-storage-site.json``

You make a storage site the primary site by passing "true". Pass "false" to make it not the primary site. (id "1" in the example):

``curl -X PUT -d true http://localhost:8080/api/admin/storageSites/1/primaryStorage``

You can delete a storage site like this (id "1" in the example):

``curl -X DELETE http://localhost:8080/api/admin/storageSites/1``

You can view a single storage site like this: (id "1" in the example):

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/storageSites/1``

You can view all storage site like this:

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/storageSites``

In the GUI, this is called "Local Access". It's where you can compute on files on your cluster.

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:LocalDataAccessPath -X PUT -d "/programs/datagrid"``

Commit message:

update guides for rsal / data access

doc/sphinx-guides/source/developers/big-data-support.rst, after:

Big Data Support
================

Big data support is highly experimental. Eventually this content will move to the Installation Guide.

.. contents:: |toctitle|
        :local:

Various components need to be installed and configured for big data support.

Data Capture Module (DCM)
-------------------------

Data Capture Module (DCM) is an experimental component that allows users to upload large datasets via rsync over ssh.

Install a DCM
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Installation instructions can be found at https://github.com/sbgrid/data-capture-module/blob/master/doc/installation.md. Note that shared storage (posix or AWS S3) between Dataverse and your DCM is required. You cannot use a DCM with Swift at this point in time.

.. FIXME: Explain what ``dataverse.files.dcm-s3-bucket-name`` is for and what it has to do with ``dataverse.files.s3-bucket-name``.

Once you have installed a DCM, you will need to configure two database settings on the Dataverse side. These settings are documented in the :doc:`/installation/config` section of the Installation Guide:

- ``:DataCaptureModuleUrl`` should be set to the URL of a DCM you installed.
- ``:UploadMethods`` should include ``dcm/rsync+ssh``.
  
This will allow your Dataverse installation to communicate with your DCM, so that Dataverse can download rsync scripts for your users.

Downloading rsync scripts via Dataverse API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The rsync script can be downloaded from Dataverse via API using an authorized API token. In the curl example below, substitute ``$PERSISTENT_ID`` with a DOI or Handle:

``curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" $DV_BASE_URL/api/datasets/:persistentId/dataCaptureModule/rsync?persistentId=$PERSISTENT_ID``

How a DCM reports checksum success or failure to Dataverse
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the user uploads files to a DCM, that DCM will perform checksum validation and report to Dataverse the results of that validation. The DCM must be configured to pass the API token of a superuser. The implementation details, which are subject to change, are below.

The JSON that a DCM sends to Dataverse on successful checksum validation looks something like the contents of :download:`checksumValidationSuccess.json <../_static/installation/files/root/big-data-support/checksumValidationSuccess.json>` below:

.. literalinclude:: ../_static/installation/files/root/big-data-support/checksumValidationSuccess.json
   :language: json

- ``status`` - The valid strings to send are ``validation passed`` and ``validation failed``.
- ``uploadFolder`` - This is the directory on disk where Dataverse should attempt to find the files that a DCM has moved into place. There should always be a ``files.sha`` file and a least one data file. ``files.sha`` is a manifest of all the data files and their checksums. The ``uploadFolder`` directory is inside the directory where data is stored for the dataset and may have the same name as the "identifier" of the persistent id (DOI or Handle). For example, you would send ``"uploadFolder": "DNXV2H"`` in the JSON file when the absolute path to this directory is ``/usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/files/10.5072/FK2/DNXV2H/DNXV2H``.
- ``totalSize`` - Dataverse will use this value to represent the total size in bytes of all the files in the "package" that's created. If 360 data files and one ``files.sha`` manifest file are in the ``uploadFolder``, this value is the sum of the 360 data files.


Here's the syntax for sending the JSON.

``curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST -H 'Content-type: application/json' --upload-file checksumValidationSuccess.json $DV_BASE_URL/api/datasets/:persistentId/dataCaptureModule/checksumValidation?persistentId=$PERSISTENT_ID``


Steps to set up a DCM mock for Development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See instructions at https://github.com/sbgrid/data-capture-module/blob/master/doc/mock.md


Add Dataverse settings to use mock (same as using DCM, noted above):

- ``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:DataCaptureModuleUrl -X PUT -d "http://localhost:5000"``
- ``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:UploadMethods -X PUT -d "dcm/rsync+ssh"``

At this point you should be able to download a placeholder rsync script. Dataverse is then waiting for news from the DCM about if checksum validation has succeeded or not. First, you have to put files in place, which is usually the job of the DCM. You should substitute "X1METO" for the "identifier" of the dataset you create. You must also use the proper path for where you store files in your dev environment.

- ``mkdir /usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/files/10.5072/FK2/X1METO``
- ``mkdir /usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/files/10.5072/FK2/X1METO/X1METO``
- ``cd /usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/files/10.5072/FK2/X1METO/X1METO``
- ``echo "hello" > file1.txt``
- ``shasum file1.txt > files.sha``



Now the files are in place and you need to send JSON to Dataverse with a success or failure message as described above. Make a copy of ``doc/sphinx-guides/source/_static/installation/files/root/big-data-support/checksumValidationSuccess.json`` and put the identifier in place such as "X1METO" under "uploadFolder"). Then use curl as described above to send the JSON.

Troubleshooting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following low level command should only be used when troubleshooting the "import" code a DCM uses but is documented here for completeness.

``curl -H "X-Dataverse-key: $API_TOKEN" -X POST "$DV_BASE_URL/api/batch/jobs/import/datasets/files/$DATASET_DB_ID?uploadFolder=$UPLOAD_FOLDER&totalSize=$TOTAL_SIZE"``

Steps to set up a DCM via Docker for Development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you need a fully operating DCM client for development purposes, these steps will guide you to setting one up. This includes steps to set up the DCM on S3 variant.

Docker Image Set-up
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

See https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/blob/develop/conf/docker-dcm/readme.md

- Install docker if you do not have it
      
Optional steps for setting up the S3 Docker DCM Variant
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Before: the default bucket for DCM to hold files in S3 is named test-dcm. It is coded into `post_upload_s3.bash` (line 30). Change to a different bucket if needed.

  - Add AWS bucket info to dcmsrv
    - Add AWS credentials to ``~/.aws/credentials``
      - ``[default]``
      - ``aws_access_key_id =``
      - ``aws_secret_access_key =``

- Dataverse configuration (on dvsrv):

  - Set S3 as the storage driver

    - ``cd /opt/glassfish4/bin/``
    - ``./asadmin delete-jvm-options "\-Ddataverse.files.storage-driver-id=file"``
    - ``./asadmin create-jvm-options "\-Ddataverse.files.storage-driver-id=s3"``

  - Add AWS bucket info to Dataverse
    - Add AWS credentials to ``~/.aws/credentials``
      - ``[default]``
      - ``aws_access_key_id =``
      - ``aws_secret_access_key =``

    - Also: set region in ``~/.aws/config`` to create a region file. Add these contents:

      - ``[default]``
      - ``region = us-east-1``

  - Add the S3 bucket names to Dataverse

    - S3 bucket for Dataverse

      - ``/usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/bin/asadmin create-jvm-options "-Ddataverse.files.s3-bucket-name=iqsstestdcmbucket"``

    - S3 bucket for DCM (as Dataverse needs to do the copy over)

      - ``/usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/bin/asadmin create-jvm-options "-Ddataverse.files.dcm-s3-bucket-name=test-dcm"``

  - Set download method to be HTTP, as DCM downloads through S3 are over this protocol ``curl -X PUT "http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:DownloadMethods" -d "native/http"``

Using the DCM Docker Containers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For using these commands, you will need to connect to the shell prompt inside various containers (e.g. ``docker exec -it dvsrv /bin/bash``)

- Create a dataset and download rsync upload script

  - connect to client container: ``docker exec -it dcm_client bash``
  - create dataset: ``cd /mnt ; ./create.bash`` ; this will echo the database ID to stdout
  - download transfer script: ``./get_transfer.bash $database_id_from_create_script``
  - execute the transfer script: ``bash ./upload-${database_id_from-create_script}.bash`` , and follow instructions from script.

- Run script

  - e.g. ``bash ./upload-3.bash`` (``3`` being the database id from earlier commands in this example).

- Manually run post upload script on dcmsrv

  - for posix implementation: ``docker exec -it dcmsrv /opt/dcm/scn/post_upload.bash``
  - for S3 implementation: ``docker exec -it dcmsrv /opt/dcm/scn/post_upload_s3.bash``

Additional DCM docker development tips
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- You can completely blow away all the docker images with these commands (including non DCM ones!)
  - ``docker-compose -f docmer-compose.yml down -v``

- There are a few logs to tail

  - dvsrv : ``tail -n 2000 -f /opt/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/logs/server.log``
  - dcmsrv : ``tail -n 2000 -f /var/log/lighttpd/breakage.log``
  - dcmsrv : ``tail -n 2000 -f /var/log/lighttpd/access.log``

- You may have to restart the glassfish domain occasionally to deal with memory filling up. If deployment is getting reallllllly slow, its a good time.

Repository Storage Abstraction Layer (RSAL)
-------------------------------------------

Steps to set up a DCM via Docker for Development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/blob/develop/conf/docker-dcm/readme.md

Using the RSAL Docker Containers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Create a dataset (either with the procedure mentioned in DCM Docker Containers, or another process)
- Publish the dataset (from the client container): ``cd /mnt; ./publish_major.bash ${database_id}``
- Run the RSAL component of the workflow (from the host): ``docker exec -it rsalsrv /opt/rsal/scn/pub.py``
- If desired, from the client container you can download the dataset following the instructions in the dataset access section of the dataset page.

Configuring the RSAL Mock
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Info for configuring the RSAL Mock: https://github.com/sbgrid/rsal/tree/master/mocks

Also, to configure Dataverse to use the new workflow you must do the following (see also the :doc:`workflows` section):

1. Configure the RSAL URL:

``curl -X PUT -d 'http://<myipaddr>:5050' http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:RepositoryStorageAbstractionLayerUrl``

2. Update workflow json with correct URL information:

Edit internal-httpSR-workflow.json and replace url and rollbackUrl to be the url of your RSAL mock.

3. Create the workflow:

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/workflows -X POST --data-binary @internal-httpSR-workflow.json -H "Content-type: application/json"``

4. List available workflows:

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/workflows``

5. Set the workflow (id) as the default workflow for the appropriate trigger:

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/workflows/default/PrePublishDataset -X PUT -d 2``

6. Check that the trigger has the appropriate default workflow set:

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/workflows/default/PrePublishDataset``

7. Add RSAL to whitelist

8. When finished testing, unset the workflow:

``curl -X DELETE http://localhost:8080/api/admin/workflows/default/PrePublishDataset``

Configuring download via rsync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to see the rsync URLs, you must run this command:

``curl -X PUT -d 'rsal/rsync' http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:DownloadMethods``

..  TODO: Document these in the Installation Guide once they're final.

To specify replication sites that appear in rsync URLs:

Download :download:`add-storage-site.json <../../../../scripts/api/data/storageSites/add-storage-site.json>` and adjust it to meet your needs. The file should look something like this:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../scripts/api/data/storageSites/add-storage-site.json

Then add the storage site using curl:

``curl -H "Content-type:application/json" -X POST http://localhost:8080/api/admin/storageSites --upload-file add-storage-site.json``

You make a storage site the primary site by passing "true". Pass "false" to make it not the primary site. (id "1" in the example):

``curl -X PUT -d true http://localhost:8080/api/admin/storageSites/1/primaryStorage``

You can delete a storage site like this (id "1" in the example):

``curl -X DELETE http://localhost:8080/api/admin/storageSites/1``

You can view a single storage site like this: (id "1" in the example):

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/storageSites/1``

You can view all storage site like this:

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/storageSites``

In the GUI, this is called "Local Access". It's where you can compute on files on your cluster.

``curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/settings/:LocalDataAccessPath -X PUT -d "/programs/datagrid"``
