doc/sphinx-guides/source/developers/make-data-count.rst, before:

Make Data Count
===============

Support for Make Data Count is a feature of Dataverse that is described in the :doc:`/admin/make-data-count` section of the Admin Guide. In order for developers to work on the feature, they must install Counter Processor, a Python 3 application, as described below. Counter Processor can be found at https://github.com/CDLUC3/counter-processor

Architecture
------------

There are many components involved in Dataverse's architecture for Make Data Count as shown in the diagram below.

|makedatacount_components|

Dev Environment Setup for Make Data Count
-----------------------------------------

The recommended way to work on the Make Data Count feature is to spin up an EC2 instance that has both Dataverse and Counter Processor installed. Go to the :doc:`deployment` page for details on how to spin up an EC2 instance and make sure that your Ansible file is configured to install Counter Processor before running the "create" script.

(Alternatively, you can try installing Counter Processor in Vagrant. :download:`setup-counter-processor.sh <../../../../scripts/vagrant/setup-counter-processor.sh>` might help you get it installed.)

After you have spun to your EC2 instance, set ``:MDCLogPath`` so that Dataverse creates a log for Counter Processor to operate on. For more on this database setting, see the :doc:`/installation/config` section of the Installation Guide.

Next you need to have Dataverse add some entries to the log that Counter Processor will operate on. To do this, click on some published datasets and download some files.

Next you should run Counter Processor to convert the log into a SUSHI report, which is in JSON format. Before running Counter Processor, you need to put a configuration file into place. As a starting point use :download:`counter-processor-config.yaml <../../../../scripts/vagrant/counter-processor-config.yaml>` and edit the file, paying particular attention to the following settings:

- ``log_name_pattern`` You might want something like ``/usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/logs/counter_(yyyy-mm-dd).log``
- ``year_month`` You should probably set this to the current month.
- ``output_file`` This needs to be a directory that the "glassfish" Unix user can read but that the "counter" user can write to. In dev, you can probably get away with "/tmp" as the directory.
- ``platform`` Out of the box from Counter Processor this is set to ``Dash`` but we're not 100% sure if this should be "Dataverse" or a branch for a Dataverse installation like "LibreScholar".
- ``upload_to_hub`` This should be "False" unless you are testing sending SUSHI reports to the DataCite hub.
- ``simulate_date`` You should probably set this to tomorrow.

Once you are done with your configuration, you can run Counter Processor like this:

``sudo -i``

``su - counter``

``cd /usr/local/counter-processor-0.0.1``

``CONFIG_FILE=counter-processor-config.yaml python36 main.py``

(Please note that the Counter Processor README says you can also pass in values like ``START_DATE``, ``END_DATE`` etc. at the command line if you find this to be more convenient.)

After ``main.py`` has finished, you should see output that a JSON file has been placed in the directory you specified in ``output_file``. Next, pass this JSON file to curl like this, substituting the DOI of the dataset you're testing with:

``curl -X POST 'http://localhost:8080/api/admin/makeDataCount/:persistentId/addUsageMetricsFromSushiReport?reportOnDisk=/tmp/sushi_sample_logs.json&persistentId=doi:10.5072/FK2/BL2IBM``

Assuming the curl command above worked, you should be able to retrieve the views and downloads via API like this, substituting the metric you're interested in (viewsTotal, viewsUnique, downloadsTotal, downloadsUnique) and the DOI of the dataset you're testing with:

``curl -X POST 'http://localhost:8080/api/datasets/:persistentId/makeDataCount/viewsTotal/2019-01&persistentId=doi:10.5072/FK2/BL2IBM``

If all this is working and you want to send data to the test instance of the Datacite hub, change ``upload_to_hub`` to "True" and contact support@datacite.org to get a JSON Web Token (JWT) to test with. Counter Processor should send the SUSHI reports for you but if you need to troubleshoot sending the reports manually, you can try the following curl command, substituting your JWT:

``curl --header "Content-Type: application/json; Accept: application/json" -H "Authorization: Bearer $JSON_WEB_TOKEN" -X POST https://api.test.datacite.org/reports/ -d @sushi_report.json``

TODO: Document how to put citations into your dev database using curl.

TODO: Document how get citations out of your dev database using curl.

Testing Make Data Count and Dataverse
-------------------------------------

A developer running Counter Processor alongside Dataverse for development or testing purposes will notice that once the raw Dataverse logs have been processed, there is no straightforward way to re-test those logs same logs.

The first thing to fix is to clear two files from Counter Processor ...

Second, if you are also sending your SUSHI report to Make Data Count, you will notice that re-running Counter Processor will not update the information logged on their servers. This is due to us clearing the state of Counter Processor, which in turn causes Counter Processor to send incorrectly structured requests to Make Data Count. The easiest way to resolve this issue is to ``DELETE`` the record Counter Processor has created on Make Data Count:

``curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $JSON_WEB_TOKEN" -X DELETE https://$MDC_SERVER/reports/$REPORT_ID``

To get the ``REPORT_ID``, look at the logs generated in ``/usr/local/counter-processor-0.0.1/tmp/datacite_response_body.txt``

To read more about the Make Data Count api, see https://github.com/datacite/sashimi

Resources
---------

The original issue for adding Make Data Count support is https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/issues/4821

.. |makedatacount_components| image:: ../admin/img/make-data-count.png
   :class: img-responsive

Commit message:

continue improving guides for Make Data Count #4821

doc/sphinx-guides/source/developers/make-data-count.rst, after:

Make Data Count
===============

Support for Make Data Count is a feature of Dataverse that is described in the :doc:`/admin/make-data-count` section of the Admin Guide. In order for developers to work on the feature, they must install Counter Processor, a Python 3 application, as described below. Counter Processor can be found at https://github.com/CDLUC3/counter-processor

Architecture
------------

There are many components involved in Dataverse's architecture for Make Data Count as shown in the diagram below.

|makedatacount_components|

Dev Environment Setup for Make Data Count
-----------------------------------------

The recommended way to work on the Make Data Count feature is to spin up an EC2 instance that has both Dataverse and Counter Processor installed. Go to the :doc:`deployment` page for details on how to spin up an EC2 instance and make sure that your Ansible file is configured to install Counter Processor before running the "create" script.

(Alternatively, you can try installing Counter Processor in Vagrant. :download:`setup-counter-processor.sh <../../../../scripts/vagrant/setup-counter-processor.sh>` might help you get it installed.)

After you have spun to your EC2 instance, set ``:MDCLogPath`` so that Dataverse creates a log for Counter Processor to operate on. For more on this database setting, see the :doc:`/installation/config` section of the Installation Guide.

Next you need to have Dataverse add some entries to the log that Counter Processor will operate on. To do this, click on some published datasets and download some files.

Next you should run Counter Processor to convert the log into a SUSHI report, which is in JSON format. Before running Counter Processor, you need to put a configuration file into place. As a starting point use :download:`counter-processor-config.yaml <../../../../scripts/vagrant/counter-processor-config.yaml>` and edit the file, paying particular attention to the following settings:

- ``log_name_pattern`` You might want something like ``/usr/local/glassfish4/glassfish/domains/domain1/logs/counter_(yyyy-mm-dd).log``
- ``year_month`` You should probably set this to the current month.
- ``output_file`` This needs to be a directory that the "glassfish" Unix user can read but that the "counter" user can write to. In dev, you can probably get away with "/tmp" as the directory.
- ``platform`` Out of the box from Counter Processor this is set to ``Dash`` but we're not 100% sure if this should be "Dataverse" or a branch for a Dataverse installation like "LibreScholar".
- ``upload_to_hub`` This should be "False" unless you are testing sending SUSHI reports to the DataCite hub.
- ``simulate_date`` You should probably set this to tomorrow.

Once you are done with your configuration, you can run Counter Processor like this:

``sudo -i``

``su - counter``

``cd /usr/local/counter-processor-0.0.1``

``CONFIG_FILE=counter-processor-config.yaml python36 main.py``

(Please note that the Counter Processor README says you can also pass in values like ``START_DATE``, ``END_DATE`` etc. at the command line if you find this to be more convenient.)

After ``main.py`` has finished, you should see output that a JSON file has been placed in the directory you specified in ``output_file``. Next, pass this JSON file to curl like this, substituting the DOI of the dataset you're testing with:

``curl -X POST 'http://localhost:8080/api/admin/makeDataCount/:persistentId/addUsageMetricsFromSushiReport?reportOnDisk=/tmp/sushi_sample_logs.json&persistentId=doi:10.5072/FK2/BL2IBM``

Assuming the curl command above worked, you should be able to retrieve the views and downloads via API like this, substituting the metric you're interested in (viewsTotal, viewsUnique, downloadsTotal, downloadsUnique) and the DOI of the dataset you're testing with:

``curl -X POST 'http://localhost:8080/api/datasets/:persistentId/makeDataCount/viewsTotal/2019-01&persistentId=doi:10.5072/FK2/BL2IBM``

If all this is working and you want to send data to the test instance of the Datacite hub, change ``upload_to_hub`` to "True" and contact support@datacite.org to get a JSON Web Token (JWT) to test with. Counter Processor should send the SUSHI reports for you but if you need to troubleshoot sending the reports manually, you can try the following curl command, substituting your JWT:

``curl --header "Content-Type: application/json; Accept: application/json" -H "Authorization: Bearer $JSON_WEB_TOKEN" -X POST https://api.test.datacite.org/reports/ -d @sushi_report.json``

For how to put citations into your dev database and how to get them out again, see "Configuring Dataverse for Make Data Count Citations" in the :doc:`/admin/make-data-count` section of the Admin Guide.

Testing Make Data Count and Dataverse
-------------------------------------

A developer running Counter Processor alongside Dataverse for development or testing purposes will notice that once the raw Dataverse logs have been processed, there is no straightforward way to re-test those logs same logs.

The first thing to fix is to clear two files from Counter Processor ...

Second, if you are also sending your SUSHI report to Make Data Count, you will notice that re-running Counter Processor will not update the information logged on their servers. This is due to us clearing the state of Counter Processor, which in turn causes Counter Processor to send incorrectly structured requests to Make Data Count. The easiest way to resolve this issue is to ``DELETE`` the record Counter Processor has created on Make Data Count:

``curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $JSON_WEB_TOKEN" -X DELETE https://$MDC_SERVER/reports/$REPORT_ID``

To get the ``REPORT_ID``, look at the logs generated in ``/usr/local/counter-processor-0.0.1/tmp/datacite_response_body.txt``

To read more about the Make Data Count api, see https://github.com/datacite/sashimi

Resources
---------

The original issue for adding Make Data Count support is https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/issues/4821

.. |makedatacount_components| image:: ../admin/img/make-data-count.png
   :class: img-responsive
