doc/sphinx-guides/source/user/account.rst, before:

Account Creation + Management
=============================

.. contents:: |toctitle|
	:local:

Account Information
-------------------

As a registered user, you can:

-  Create your own dataverse, if permitted, and customize it.
-  Add datasets to dataverses, if permitted.
-  Contribute to existing datasets, if permitted.
-  Request access to restricted files, if permitted.

Account Log In Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Dataverse has been configured for one or more of the following log in options:

- Username/Email and Password
- Institutional Log In
- ORCID
- GitHub
- Google

Please note that once you create your Dataverse account, it will be associated with only one of the log in options above.

The Institutional Log In, ORCID, GitHub, and Google options are described in more detail below under "Remote Authentication."

Create Account
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create a Dataverse account with the Username/Email log in option, use the "Sign Up" page. Fill out the fields, and then click the 'Create Account' button. Please note that the Username field does not support email addresses but will allow the following characters: a-Z, 0-9, _ (underscores), - (hyphens), and . (periods).

To create a Dataverse account associated with the log in option for your institution, ORCID, GitHub, or Google, use the "Log In" page and select one of the authentication providers. See the "Remote Authentication" section below for details.

Edit Account 
~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. To edit your account after you have logged in, click on your account name in the header on the right hand side and click on Account Information.
#. On the top right of your account page, click on the "Edit Account" button and from there you can select to edit either your Account Information or your Account Password.
#. Select "Save Changes" when you are done.

Please note that you cannot edit your account information within Dataverse if you use the Institutional Log In option. Instead, you should contact your institution to change your name, email, etc. Once the change is made by your institution, it will be reflected in Dataverse the next time you log in. Users of the Institutional Log In option are not required to verify their email address because the institution providing the email address is trusted.

Convert Account
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If more than one log in option is available, you can convert from one to another and use the new option from now on.

If you are converting from the Email/Username log in option you will need to have your password ready to complete the conversion process. Click Log In, select the new log in option, and go through the log in process. When you return to Dataverse, look for an option allowing you to convert and enter your password to complete the conversion. The section on Remote Authentication below has more specific information on converting to Institutional Log In, ORCID, GitHub, and Google.

If you need to perform any other conversion (i.e. from Google to GitHub), use the Support link at the top of the page for assistance.

Reset Account Password
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Only Dataverse accounts using the Username/Email log in option have an associated password stored (securely!) in Dataverse. If you cannot remember this password, click on Log In in the top right corner of any page and click the "Forgot Password?" link below where you would enter your username/email and password. Enter your email address and click "Submit Password Request" to receive an email with a link to reset your password.

Please note that if you have forgotten your username, you can use this same process to receive your username in an email.

Remote Authentication
---------------------

Too many passwords? You can set up your Dataverse account to use log in credentials from one of the following remote authentication providers. This way, you can log in using your existing credentials from another service.

Institutional Log In
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Institutional log in allows you to use your log in information for your university (e.g. HarvardKey at Harvard) to log in to your Dataverse account.

Create a Dataverse account using Institutional Log In
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Go to “Log In” in the upper right corner of Dataverse.
#. Select the "Your Institution" button under the "Other options" header
#. Using the dropdown menu, select your institution then click the Continue button to go to your institution's log in page.
#. After you put in your institutional credentials successfully, you will be brought back to Dataverse to confirm your account information, and click "Create Account".
#. A username has been selected for you. You won't use this username to log in but it will appear next to your name when other users search for you to assign permissions within the system. To see what you username is, click on your name in the top right corner and click Account Information.

If you do not find your institution listed, you will need to request that it is added to the Research & Scholarship category of InCommon. Contact support for assistance on how to get this process started with the identity provider support team at your institution.

Convert your Dataverse account to use your Institutional Log In
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you already have a Dataverse account associated with the Username/Email log in option, but you want to convert it to use your institutional log in, you can easily do so as long as your account uses an email address from that institution.

#. Go to the Account Information page to confirm that your account email address is the same as your institutional email address. If not, you will need to update your Dataverse account to make them match.
#. Log out of Dataverse.
#. Go to “Log In” in the upper right corner of Dataverse.
#. Select the "Your Institution" button under the "Other options" header.
#. Using the dropdown menu, select your institution then click the Continue button to go to your institution's log in page.
#. After you put in your institutional credentials successfully, you will be brought back to Dataverse to confirm your account information.
#. Enter your current password for your Dataverse account and click "Convert Account".
#. Now you have finished converting your Dataverse account to use your institutional log in.

Convert your Dataverse account away from your Institutional Log In
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you are leaving your institution and need to convert your Dataverse account to the Dataverse Username/Email log in option, you will need to contact support for the Dataverse installation you are using. On your account page, there is a link that will open a popup form to contact support for assistance.

ORCID Log In
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can set up your Dataverse account to allow you to log in using your ORCID credentials. ORCID® is an independent non-profit effort to provide an open registry of unique researcher identifiers and open services to link research activities and organizations to these identifiers. Learn more at `orcid.org <http://orcid.org>`_. 

Create a Dataverse account using ORCID
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Go to “Log In” in the upper right corner of Dataverse.
#. Click the "ORCID" button under the "Other options" header.
#. Click the "Log In with ORCID" button to go to the ORCID website.
#. If you do not already have an ORCID account, you can create one on this page. If you already have an ORCID account, click on "Sign in" and then enter your login under the "Personal account" tab.
#. After you put in your ORCID credentials successfully, you will be brought back to Dataverse to confirm the creation of your Dataverse account. If your ORCID account's privacy settings permit it, the email address you've linked to your ORCID account will be suggested to you as an option. You can use this email if you like, or you can use any other email you might wish. If you have entered employment information within your ORCID account, the name of your employer will be suggested for the "Affiliation" field.

Convert your Dataverse account to use ORCID for log in
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
 
If you already have a Dataverse account associated with the Username/Email log in option, but you want to convert it to use ORCID for log in, follow these steps:

#. Log out of Dataverse.
#. Go to "Log In" in the upper right corner of Dataverse.
#. Click the "ORCID" button under the "Other options" header.
#. Click the "Log In with ORCID" button to go to the ORCID website.
#. If you do not already have an ORCID account, you can create one on this page. If you already have an ORCID account, click on "Sign in" and then enter your login under the "Personal account" tab.
#. After you put in your ORCID credentials successfully, you will be brought back to Dataverse. Click the "convert your account" link.
#. Enter your username and password for your Dataverse account and click "Convert Account".
#. Now you have finished converting your Dataverse account to use ORCID for log in.

Convert your Dataverse account away from ORCID for log in
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you don't want to log in to Dataverse using ORCID any more, you will want to convert your Dataverse account to the Dataverse Username/Email log in option. To do this, you will need to contact support for the Dataverse installation you are using. On your account page, there is a link that will open a popup form to contact support for assistance.

GitHub and Google Log In
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can also convert your Dataverse account to use authentication provided by GitHub or Google. These options may be found in the "Other options" section of the log in page, and function similarly to how ORCID is outlined above. If you would like to convert your account away from using one of these services for log in, then you can follow the same steps as listed above for converting away from the ORCID log in.

My Data
-------

The My Data section of your account page displays a listing of all the dataverses, datasets, and files you have either created, uploaded or that you have access to edit. You are able to filter through all the dataverses, datasets, and files listed there using the filter box. You may also use the facets on the left side to only view a specific Publication Status or Role.

Notifications
-------------

Notifications appear in the notifications tab on your account page and are also displayed as a number next to your account name.

You will receive a notification when:

- You've created your account
- You've created a dataverse or added a dataset
- Another Dataverse user has requested access to a restricted file in one of your datasets

Notifications will only be emailed one time even if you haven't read the notification on the Dataverse site.

API Token
---------

#. To create your API token, click on your name in the header on the right hand side and then click on API Token.
#. In this tab, you can create your API Token for the first time as well as recreate it if you need a new API Token or if your API Token becomes compromised.

Commit message:

My Data page - fixing inaccuracies, explaining confusion [#5965]
Fixed an inaccurate bit and explained why some people are encountering unexpected entries on this page, as documented in #5880

doc/sphinx-guides/source/user/account.rst, after:

Account Creation + Management
=============================

.. contents:: |toctitle|
	:local:

Account Information
-------------------

As a registered user, you can:

-  Create your own dataverse, if permitted, and customize it.
-  Add datasets to dataverses, if permitted.
-  Contribute to existing datasets, if permitted.
-  Request access to restricted files, if permitted.

Account Log In Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Dataverse has been configured for one or more of the following log in options:

- Username/Email and Password
- Institutional Log In
- ORCID
- GitHub
- Google

Please note that once you create your Dataverse account, it will be associated with only one of the log in options above.

The Institutional Log In, ORCID, GitHub, and Google options are described in more detail below under "Remote Authentication."

Create Account
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create a Dataverse account with the Username/Email log in option, use the "Sign Up" page. Fill out the fields, and then click the 'Create Account' button. Please note that the Username field does not support email addresses but will allow the following characters: a-Z, 0-9, _ (underscores), - (hyphens), and . (periods).

To create a Dataverse account associated with the log in option for your institution, ORCID, GitHub, or Google, use the "Log In" page and select one of the authentication providers. See the "Remote Authentication" section below for details.

Edit Account 
~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. To edit your account after you have logged in, click on your account name in the header on the right hand side and click on Account Information.
#. On the top right of your account page, click on the "Edit Account" button and from there you can select to edit either your Account Information or your Account Password.
#. Select "Save Changes" when you are done.

Please note that you cannot edit your account information within Dataverse if you use the Institutional Log In option. Instead, you should contact your institution to change your name, email, etc. Once the change is made by your institution, it will be reflected in Dataverse the next time you log in. Users of the Institutional Log In option are not required to verify their email address because the institution providing the email address is trusted.

Convert Account
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If more than one log in option is available, you can convert from one to another and use the new option from now on.

If you are converting from the Email/Username log in option you will need to have your password ready to complete the conversion process. Click Log In, select the new log in option, and go through the log in process. When you return to Dataverse, look for an option allowing you to convert and enter your password to complete the conversion. The section on Remote Authentication below has more specific information on converting to Institutional Log In, ORCID, GitHub, and Google.

If you need to perform any other conversion (i.e. from Google to GitHub), use the Support link at the top of the page for assistance.

Reset Account Password
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Only Dataverse accounts using the Username/Email log in option have an associated password stored (securely!) in Dataverse. If you cannot remember this password, click on Log In in the top right corner of any page and click the "Forgot Password?" link below where you would enter your username/email and password. Enter your email address and click "Submit Password Request" to receive an email with a link to reset your password.

Please note that if you have forgotten your username, you can use this same process to receive your username in an email.

Remote Authentication
---------------------

Too many passwords? You can set up your Dataverse account to use log in credentials from one of the following remote authentication providers. This way, you can log in using your existing credentials from another service.

Institutional Log In
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Institutional log in allows you to use your log in information for your university (e.g. HarvardKey at Harvard) to log in to your Dataverse account.

Create a Dataverse account using Institutional Log In
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Go to “Log In” in the upper right corner of Dataverse.
#. Select the "Your Institution" button under the "Other options" header
#. Using the dropdown menu, select your institution then click the Continue button to go to your institution's log in page.
#. After you put in your institutional credentials successfully, you will be brought back to Dataverse to confirm your account information, and click "Create Account".
#. A username has been selected for you. You won't use this username to log in but it will appear next to your name when other users search for you to assign permissions within the system. To see what you username is, click on your name in the top right corner and click Account Information.

If you do not find your institution listed, you will need to request that it is added to the Research & Scholarship category of InCommon. Contact support for assistance on how to get this process started with the identity provider support team at your institution.

Convert your Dataverse account to use your Institutional Log In
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you already have a Dataverse account associated with the Username/Email log in option, but you want to convert it to use your institutional log in, you can easily do so as long as your account uses an email address from that institution.

#. Go to the Account Information page to confirm that your account email address is the same as your institutional email address. If not, you will need to update your Dataverse account to make them match.
#. Log out of Dataverse.
#. Go to “Log In” in the upper right corner of Dataverse.
#. Select the "Your Institution" button under the "Other options" header.
#. Using the dropdown menu, select your institution then click the Continue button to go to your institution's log in page.
#. After you put in your institutional credentials successfully, you will be brought back to Dataverse to confirm your account information.
#. Enter your current password for your Dataverse account and click "Convert Account".
#. Now you have finished converting your Dataverse account to use your institutional log in.

Convert your Dataverse account away from your Institutional Log In
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you are leaving your institution and need to convert your Dataverse account to the Dataverse Username/Email log in option, you will need to contact support for the Dataverse installation you are using. On your account page, there is a link that will open a popup form to contact support for assistance.

ORCID Log In
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can set up your Dataverse account to allow you to log in using your ORCID credentials. ORCID® is an independent non-profit effort to provide an open registry of unique researcher identifiers and open services to link research activities and organizations to these identifiers. Learn more at `orcid.org <http://orcid.org>`_. 

Create a Dataverse account using ORCID
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Go to “Log In” in the upper right corner of Dataverse.
#. Click the "ORCID" button under the "Other options" header.
#. Click the "Log In with ORCID" button to go to the ORCID website.
#. If you do not already have an ORCID account, you can create one on this page. If you already have an ORCID account, click on "Sign in" and then enter your login under the "Personal account" tab.
#. After you put in your ORCID credentials successfully, you will be brought back to Dataverse to confirm the creation of your Dataverse account. If your ORCID account's privacy settings permit it, the email address you've linked to your ORCID account will be suggested to you as an option. You can use this email if you like, or you can use any other email you might wish. If you have entered employment information within your ORCID account, the name of your employer will be suggested for the "Affiliation" field.

Convert your Dataverse account to use ORCID for log in
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
 
If you already have a Dataverse account associated with the Username/Email log in option, but you want to convert it to use ORCID for log in, follow these steps:

#. Log out of Dataverse.
#. Go to "Log In" in the upper right corner of Dataverse.
#. Click the "ORCID" button under the "Other options" header.
#. Click the "Log In with ORCID" button to go to the ORCID website.
#. If you do not already have an ORCID account, you can create one on this page. If you already have an ORCID account, click on "Sign in" and then enter your login under the "Personal account" tab.
#. After you put in your ORCID credentials successfully, you will be brought back to Dataverse. Click the "convert your account" link.
#. Enter your username and password for your Dataverse account and click "Convert Account".
#. Now you have finished converting your Dataverse account to use ORCID for log in.

Convert your Dataverse account away from ORCID for log in
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you don't want to log in to Dataverse using ORCID any more, you will want to convert your Dataverse account to the Dataverse Username/Email log in option. To do this, you will need to contact support for the Dataverse installation you are using. On your account page, there is a link that will open a popup form to contact support for assistance.

GitHub and Google Log In
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can also convert your Dataverse account to use authentication provided by GitHub or Google. These options may be found in the "Other options" section of the log in page, and function similarly to how ORCID is outlined above. If you would like to convert your account away from using one of these services for log in, then you can follow the same steps as listed above for converting away from the ORCID log in.

My Data
-------

The My Data section of your account page displays a listing of all the dataverses, datasets, and files you have either created, uploaded or that you have a role assigned on. If you see unexpected dataverses or datasets in your My Data page, it might be because someone has assigned your account a role on those dataverses or datasets. For example, some institutions automatically assign the "File Downloader" role on their datasets to all accounts using their institutional login.


You are able to filter through all the dataverses, datasets, and files listed on your My Data page using the filter box. You may also use the facets on the left side to only view a specific Publication Status or Role.


Notifications
-------------

Notifications appear in the notifications tab on your account page and are also displayed as a number next to your account name.

You will receive a notification when:

- You've created your account
- You've created a dataverse or added a dataset
- Another Dataverse user has requested access to a restricted file in one of your datasets

Notifications will only be emailed one time even if you haven't read the notification on the Dataverse site.

API Token
---------

#. To create your API token, click on your name in the header on the right hand side and then click on API Token.
#. In this tab, you can create your API Token for the first time as well as recreate it if you need a new API Token or if your API Token becomes compromised.
